Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



Ill 



600083675- 




A COMPENDIUM 



OF 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 



A COMPENDIUM 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR, 



I THE POKTDGUESB (eLBTBBTH EDlTIOs) OF 
C. A. DE FIOUEIREDO VIEIKA, AMD THE 



A. KlNliOCH, 

LATB CAFTAIH 36lB BBOT. 



A. J. DOS REIS, 



WILLIAMS AND NORGATE : 

14, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON, 

AND an. SOUTH FREDERICK STREET, EDINBtlRGH. 

IB76. 






HERTFORD: 

f&INTXD BT BTXPEKM AVBTIK AND SOMA. 



L 



TO 

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE 

LORD LYTTON, 

LATE H.B.M.'S MUTESTEB DT P0BTU6AL, 

AKD 

TICEBOT AJSTD OOTERNOB-GSirERAL OF INDIA, 

THIS LITTLB WOKK IS, 
BY PERMISSION, 



RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED. 



SUBSCRIBERS. 



The Kigbt Hon. the Earl of DerbT. 

His Grace the Lord President of the Council (6 eopiesj. 

The Rig;ht Hon. the Vice-rresidenl (Committee on Education) ( 

copies) . 
The Most kev. His Urace the Archbishop of Armagh. 
Maior-Geueral Wynyard. 
Col-theHon. C. H.LiudiuiT. 
Col. J. J. Graham. 
Professor dos Beis. 

G. M. Xorris, Esq., Education Department (2 copies). 
A. L. Cory, Esq., AesistanC Secretary, Education Department. 
Chiu. Merrilield, Esq., Education Department. 
W. Palgrave, Esq., Assistant Secretary, Education Department. 
J. R. Smith, Esq., Education Department. 
H. F. Pooley, Esq., Education Department. 
C. W. Kinloch, Esq., lata Bengal Civil Service (2 copies). 
J. Tulloch, Esq., Education Department. 
H. S. Bryant, Esq., Private Secretary, Education Department. 
S L App«rson Esq Education Department. 
A. Barratt, Esq Education Department. 
J W Edwards Esq Education Department. 
G Sin T r Department, 

fhar s 

E r D on Uepattment. 

M 1 ^ copies) 

(. ■\\ 1 



vale Secretary, Education Department. 

H T E tion Department. 

F ( H ation Department.* 

5 J ycr J_ J i. ilepartment. 

H W Hoarc Esq Education Department (2 copies) . 

6 W Keliewich Esq Educat on Department. 

J Sykes Esq Assistant Secretary, Education Department. 

G A Smith Esq Education Department. 

T S Rohertson Esq Education Department. 

W J Ritchie Esq Education Department {2 copies). 

W J Courthope Esq Education Department. 

H M Mackenzie Esq Education Department, 

C W Kiteon, Esq (2 copiet) 

P Cumin Esq Assislant SFcielarv, Education Department. 

J A Einloch Esq War Office 



PREFACE. 



A COMPOUND of the Latin, Teutonic^ and Arabic, 
and not, as it has been somewhat disparagingly 
termed,^ a boneless Castilian, the Portuguese 
language may be regarded as a Galician, rather 
than, so to speak, a reaUy Spanish dialect. 

To English students it is comparatiyely but 
little known ; indeed, an acquaintance with 
Portuguese is the exception rather than the rule 
amongst such scholars. Considering, however, 
that the little kingdom of Portugal, once our 
faithful ally in a great war, has still some posses^ 
sions in India, China, and Africa (East and 
West), und that the language is spoken in the 
Azores and Madeiras, the Cape de Yerd Islands, 
and the great empire of Brazil, moreover that, 
though lacking the richness and power of Spanish, 
it forms perhaps a better conversational medium, 
its attainment should not be deemed altogether 
unprofitable. 

Lusitania, it is true, has not been prolific of 
very many great men : still it has had its Albu- 

1 Sismondi. 



X PREPACK. 

querque, its Pombal, and its Camoens ; i whilst 
Ribeyro, Ferreyra, Bemaldes, S& de Miranda, 
Meneses, Vicente, Castro, Caminha, Corterreal, 
Vasconcellos, Lobo, Faria y Sousa, and Countess 
Vimeiro, as poets ; and Barros, Castanheda, de 
Brito, Herculano, Marques, Couto, Freire, etc., 
as historians and authors, have, with others of 
their countrymen in past years, a recognized title 
to literary fame. 

The Portuguese savans and literati of later 
days, notably Bocage, Manoel, Gonzaga, Macedo, 
Silva, and a few others, have likewise claims to 
distinction ; nor must the labours of Vieyra, Con- 
stancio, and Figueiredo Vieira, as grammarians 
and lexicographers, be lightly regarded. 

Possibly, therefore, the present unpretending 
little treatise on the Elements of Portuguese 
Grammar, though scarcely more than a compila- 
tion and abridgment from the Portuguese, may 
not be without use to the intending student, 
whether such be the roving Englishman so surely 
to be encoimtered in every clime, or the less 
restless scholar whom the res angmta domi, or 
other causes, retain at home. 

London, lat June^ 1876. 

^ It might also be said its Vasco de Gama. 



PRONUNCIATION OF PORTUGUESE. 



The Portuguese Alphabet is composed of 25 letters,* 

« 

as follows : 



a 


pronounced 


ah. 


n pronoi 


inced ennay. 


b 




hay. 


, 


t 0. 


c 




say. 


P 


pay^ 


d 


If 


day. 


q 


t ^• 


e 


t) 


at. 


r 't 


, erray. 


f 


»> 


effay. 


8 t 


, essay. 


g 


ft 


J^' 


t 


t ^' 


h 


tj 


ayhah. 


^ t 


, 00. 


• 

1 


yj 


ee. 


V , 


, vay. 


• 


ft 


m « 


X , 


, shees. 


k 


tt 


kah. 


y 


J ypsilon 


1 


tt 


ellay. 


z , 


y tea. 


m 


tt 


emmay. 







^ Gonstancio and P. de Souza. According to Yieyra (Porta- 
guese Grammar) of 24 only. He ignores the letter ky which is 
in fact used only for foreign words or proper names introduced 
into the Portuguese language. 



EKRATA. 



Page 5, note, for Sur, OonstanciO) etc., read Snr., etc. 
„ 61, line 4, for after y read before. 
„ 61, „ 10, despes in ordinary type. 



» 62, , 

»» 63, , 
)i 76, , 



16, insert after meqae, mega. 

11, forya, already, read jd. 

19, for eomplement adjective ^redA objective complement. 

11, for aubatantivet read superlatives. 



„ 79, last line, for el, read 0/. 



mTRODUCTION. 



\ 



Grammab is the science or art of properly ex- 
pressing words. 

It is divided into general, and particular or 
special grammar. 

Qrammar in general is the exponent of the 
principles common to, or general in, aU languages. 

Grammar, in respect to any particular lan- 
guage, is the art of speating or writing that 
tongue correctly ; for example : 

The Portuguese Grammar is the art of writing 
or speaking correctly the Portuguese language. 

It is divided into four parts, Etymology, Syntax, 
Prosody, and Orthography. 

Etymology explains the nature and property of 
words. 

Syntax teaches the composition of correct 
phraseology. 

Prosody teaches the correct pronimciation and 

accent of words. 

1 



2 FORTUOUESE OEAMMAB. 

Orthography teaches the " correct writing and 
reading" of words, and the use of punctuation. 

Sentences are the expression of an opinion. They 
are composed of words, and these again of syllables. 

A syllable is the sound represented by one or 
more letters, pronounced in one single utterance ; 
Example : a he-lha} 

A diphthong is the union of two vowels in one 
syllable ; ex. : lei. 

Words, according to their employment in speech,^ 
are divided into seven classes,^ denominated parts 
of speech; that is to say, the noun substantive, 
the adjective^ verb, preposition, adverb, conjunction, 
and interjection. 

^ Letters are diyided into v<nt>$h and coMonaniB, Towels are 
those which by themselyes alone can form a perfect sonnd : such 
are the letters a, e, iy Oy u, y. All other letters are styled cotuonantSy 
because they cannot be pronounced without the aid of some vowel. 

Now, when two vowels are joined together, so that their sounds 
are, as it were, confounded, the one being long and predominant, 
the other being short, or even mute, they are called diphthonga. 
These, in Portuguese, are ae, at, ay; aoy au; «t, eyy eoy eu; to, iu; 
ocy oiy ay, ou; ue, uiy uy. There are then eight diphthongs, which 
may be written in the whole of the eighteen modes here denoted. 

The vowel or diphthong joined to the letters tn, n, or to the 
syllable til, is called a nasal vowel or diphthong. Examples are 
tiie first syllable of amparo, protection, and the last syllable of 
eorofSo, courage. 

' Sode divide words into nine classes (noun, article, pronoun, 
verb, participle, preposition, adverb, conjunction, interjection) ; 
but, according to the best national grammarians, the article, pro- 
noun and participle may be regarded as a species of adjective. 



FORTUOUESE GRAMMAR. 



OF ETYMOLOGY. 



The Substantive. 



Substantives are the words which give names to 
the persons or things which we presume to exist, 
or have kaowledge of ; or they may be corporeal, 
as pau, wood, pedra, a stone ; or incorporeal, as 
virtude, virtue, espirito, spirit. 

Substantives are divided into proper, appellative, 
and collective. Substantives proper are those which 
signify one sole person or thing, as Joao, John, 
Roma, Rome. 

Appellative substantives are those which may be 
appUed to many things or persons, as exercito, 
army, rebanho, flock. 

When collective substantives signify only part of 
a multitude, they are caiHei partitive ; ex. : porgao, 
portion, parte, part. The others are called general 
collectives. 

Words have certain properties, which are called 
declensions ; those of the substantives are five, 
that is to say, the signification, kind, figure, gender, 
and number. 

The signification of substantives (and of words 



4 FORTUOtJESE GRAMMAR. . 

in general) consists in the meaning they bear, and 
may be natural or figurative; it is natural when 
the words express the same idea as that for which 
they have been invented ; ex. : o tigre 4 feroz, the 
tiger is ferocious ; it is figurative when they ex- 
press a different idea from their primitive mean- 
ing 5 ex. : Pedro 4 urn tigre, i.e. Peter is as fierce 
as a tiger. 

Species or kind in words consists in being primi- 
tive or derivative. Words are called primitive 
which are not derived from others in the same 
language ; ex. : pedra, a stone, arvore, a tree ; de- 
rivative when they take their origin from others, 
aspedraria, freestone, arvoredo, grove. 

The figure in words consists in being simple or 
compound. The simple are those which, if divided, 
have no meaning, as mar, the sea, beira, the shore; 
the compound are those which may be divided into 
complete words, as beira-mar, sea-shore. 

Oender with substantives is the different form 
under which is designated the male or the female. 
The genders are two, the masculine and the femi- 
nine. 

Of the masculine gender are words which signify 
the male; ex.: homem, man, leao, lion; and of the 
feminine, those which signify the female ; ex. : 
mulher, woman, leoa, lioness. 



PORTUOTTESE 6RAMMAB. O 

There are many substantiyes which, without 
signifying male or f emale, are considered, when 
used, mascniine or feminine ; ex. : casa, honse, 
fogareirOy brazier. Those to which, without loss 
of euphony, can be added the article o, may be 
called masculine ; ex. : o fogarexro ; feminine, 
those to which may be prefixed the article a; ex. : 
a cam. 

The names of certain animals are styled epicene ^ 
which, though masculine or feminine, designate 
indistinctly the male and female ; ex. : o salmao, 
the salmon, asardinha, the sardine. To indicate 
the sex to which these names refer, we say, for 
example, a sardinha tnaeha,^ the male sardine, o 
salmdo femeay the female salmon ; or o macho da 
sardin/uiy the male of, etc. 

The substantiyes are of either gender, which, 
under one sole form or termination, denote man 
or woman ; ex. : o martyr, or a martyr, the martyr. 

The sex to which substantiyes belong may, 
howeyer, be denoted in three modes : 

^ We ask those who may take exception to the use of this word 
not to condemn it without fiist consulting the Gnunmatical Intro- 
dnction to the Portngnese Dictionary of Snr. Oonstancio (p. 14, 
col. 2), and also lefenring to the obsenrations of this lexicographer 
and Moraes on the word -maeho-. It is, besides, known that the 
adjectives in o change it into a, when they are joined to feminine 
sahetantiyes ; we belieye, howeyer, that not only reason speaks in 
our fayonr, bat also practice : <* Quern pmn arbUrwm «t^, 9t/u» ei 
nwma lequmdi,* 



L* »» 



b FOBTUOUESE GRAMMAR. 

1st. By joining to common or epicene nouns 
some adjective or substantive which declares the 
sex, as before said. 

2nd. By making use of different words, accord- 
ing to the different sex of the individuals named ; 
ex. : homemy man, muUher^ woman. 

3rd. By varying the termination in the foUow- 
faig manner : 

Masculine substantives ending in o, almost all 
change into a, in order to denote the female ; ex. : 
a pamba^ (the hen dove) is the female of pambo. 

Masculine substantives ending in ao change it 
into oa or oma, or lose merely the o ; ex. : kao 
leoa, valentSo, vakntona, brave man and woman, 
irmao, irma, brother, sister. • 

Masculine substantives ending in or nearly 
all change this termination into ora ; ex. : pintar, 
pintora, painter. 

There are, however, some substantives, not only 
with this, but other terminations, which are ir- 
regular, as use will teach. 

The numbers in grammar are two : the singular ^ 
which refers to one sole person or thing; the 
plural, which refers to more than one. 

The plural of nouns ending in vowels is formed 
by adding to them an « ; ex. : livro, livros, book, 
books ; pat, pais, father, fathers. 



FORTUGUESE ORAMMAR. 7 

Exceptions are notms ending in So, which, for 
the most part, form the plural by changing the 
ao into oes; ex. : caragao, eorafSea, heart, hearts. 
Some, however, follow the general role, as irmao, 
irtnaos, brother, brethren ; and d^ers change the 
So into aes, as pSo, paea} 

^ In order to obTiaAe the difficulty of fomung the plnnd of 
nouns ending in So, Portngnese grammarians have recourse to 
Latin and Spanish, and lay down the following roles : 

Ist. They form the plural by oea of nouns ending in So, and 
which are derived from Spanish substantiyes terminating in on in 
the singular, and ones in the plural, or from Latin words in o in 
the nominatiTe, in onmn in the accusative, and cm in the ablative ; 
ex. : sermao, discourse, aermoes ; oraqaoy prayer, orafoea. 

2nd. They form the plural in aos of nouns ending in 00, and 
which are derived from Latin words ending in anut, or from 
Spanish terminating with ano in the singular and anos in the 
plural ; ex. : moo, hand, takes ao8 in the plural, from its derivation 
from the Latin word manua ; and in like manner, in Spanish, the 
word mono has its plural in anos. 

3rd. They form the plural of nouns ending in So by Sm, when 
these are derived from Spanish words terminating in on in the 
singular and ones in the plural ; or Latin in «m in the nominative, 
nem in the accusative, and ne in the ablative. The word pao, 
bread, derived from panis, and the plural of which, according to 
rule, is paes, serves as an example. Such are the rules of Barreto, 
Madureira, and Constancio ; but, as many may be unable to avail 
themselves thereof, the following rules are selected from the gram- 
mar of Moraes : — ^Nouns ending in So form, for the most part, the 
plural iRdes; ex. : sertnao, discourse, sermoes. Except we must, 
however, in the first place— for having their plural in aos — the 
following nouns : aeeon^, sentence, ehao, soil, ehrisiao, christian, 
eoimhraoy native of Coimbra, eomarcao^ border, grao^ degree, irmao^ 
brother, lotto, (game of) loto, mao, hand, orfao, orphan, or^So, 
organ, orsgaOf origanum (herb), pagaoj pagan, ralAOf cob, no, 



8 FORTUOUESE GRAMMAR. 

The plural of nouns eliding in al, ol^ ul, is 
formed by changing the I into es ; ex. : pardal, 
sparrow, pardaes, sparrows; rol, list, roes, lists; 
paul, marsh, paues, marshes. An exception is 
mal, evil, which makes males, evils, and consul, 
consul (with its compoxmds), which becomes con- 
sules in the plural. 

The plural of those which end in ^/ is formed 
by changing the / into is; ex. : annel, ring, anneis, 
rings. 

The plural of those ending in il is formed by 
changing the / into s ; ex. : /unil, funnel, /wnis, 
funnels. 

The plural of those ending in m is formed by 
changing the m into ns ; ex. : homem, man, 
homens. 

The plural of those which end in r or 2 is 
formed by adding to them the syllable es ; ex. : 
flor, a ^ower, flares; noz, walnut, nazes. 

Many of the nouns which have 6 in the last 

saint, totao, cellar^ tultaoy sultan^ temporao, early season^ vao, ford, 
zangaOf drone, dtdo, hound, aldedo, countryman, anaOy dwarf, aneiao, 
old man, bettfoo, blessing, eaatellao, chdtelain, eidadao, citizen, eor- 
tezao, courtier, villaOf villager, to which, howeyer, the plural is 
sometimes formed by oes. 

Excepting also, in the 2nd place, alletnaOf German, mo, dog, 
eaialao, Catalan, dMO^ dean, ermitao^ hermit, aermao, sermon, eacri- 
vao, writer, guardiao, guardian, mattapao, marchpane, pao, bread, 
taerisiao, sacristan, tabelliao notary, which have the plural in aes. 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 9 

syllable but one, change it into 6 when they be- 
come plural ; ex. : ^ egg, &f>08 eggs. Others, as 
contomo, circuit, sarvOy sip, and potro, colt, pre- 
serve the circumflex accent also in the plural. 

Some nouns there are which have no plural; 
others without the singular; others, again, with 
one only form or ending denote both numbers. 

There is no plural, when taken in their natural 
sense : 

1st. To proper names, as Manuel, Sol (Saul). 

2nd. To the names of virtues, vices, arts, 
sciences, professions, etc., as velhicey old age, mede- 
cina, medicine, pinturUy painting, preguiga, idle- 
ness, diligenciay diligence. 

Nouns have no singular which signify pairs, or 
the like, or the imion of things of the same kind, 
as and€i8y andilhas, side saddles, algemas, fetters, 
brassas, hot coals, /atM^«, throats, etc. 

The following have both singular and plural 
alike ; ouriveSy goldsmith, cties, quay, pirea, saucer, 
alferes, lieutenant, arraes, skipper, simples, simples, 
etc. 

The A^ective, 

Adjectives are words which express the quali- 
ties of, or determine the signification of substan- 
tives. 



10 FORTUOUESE GRAMMAR. 

They are divided into attributive and determinate 
adjectiyes. 

Determinate ac^'ectivea are those which determine 
and apply appellative names to certain individuals 
in particular; they are subdivided into four 
kinds, i.e. : 

1st. The Articles. The articles are certain 
words which are joined to appellatives, in order 
to indicate that their general signification is 
limited to individuals in particular. There are 
two articles; the definite Oy a, 08, as, which is joined 
to appellatives when it is wished to limit their 
signification; ex. :^ o homem que vi^ era alto, the 
man I saw was tall. This article is added not 
merely to appellatives, but likewise to other parts 
of speech, when used in place of appellatives; 
ex. : ler i proveitoso, reading is profitable ; o 
Homero Portuguez morreu pobre, the Portuguese 
Homer died poor. 

The second article is the indefinite um, uma, 
uns, umas, a, an, etc., which indicates also indi- 
viduals, but indeterminate ; ex. : um estudiante 
deve estudar muito, a scholar must study much. 

^ Sabstantiyes are taken in a definite or determinate sense, 
when they signify a kind, species, or particular indiyidual ; ex. : 
a rota d hella Jhr, the rose is a beautiful flower ; a roaa que nu 
deate era de mmgo; a rosa de muago i beUa e odorifera, the rose 
yon gave me was a musk rose; the musk rose is beautiful and 
odoriferous. 



FOBTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 11 

2nd. Personal Pronouns. The personal pro- 
nouns are certain words which indicate the sub- 
stantive by the person they represent in discourse, 
and which sometimes axe substituted for the noun, 
the repetition of which it is wished to avoid; 
ex. : elle nao me viu hontem, he did not see me 
yesterday. The pronoun elle is here substituted 
for the name of Joao, John, Antony, or other 
name. 

The personal pronoims are eleven : six primitive, 
and five derivative. 

The primitive are, in the singular eu, I, to de- 
note the 1st person, tu, thou, the 2nd, elk, ella, he, 
she, the 3rd ; in the plural, nds, we, to denote the 1st 
person, v6s, ye, the 2nd, elles (ellasj, they, the 3rd. 
The personal reciprocal se, himself or themselves, 
is the 6th, which has reference to the 3rd person 
of both singular and pluraL 

There are then three persons in grammar, the 
1st, the one who speaks ; 2nd, the one addressed; 
3rd, the one referred to. These three persons are 
represented in discourse by personal pronouns, as 
just stated. 

These pronoims are converted into me, me, te, 
thee, Ihe, him, nds, us, v6s, you, Ihes, them, when 
they serve as complement to any verb ; ex. : 
louvo^te I praise thee ; and into mim, fi, si, migo. 



12 FOBTUOUESE ORAMMAB. 

tigOf sigOf nosco, vosco, when joined to prepositions; 
ex. : comtigo, with thee. 

The derivative personal pronounBy styled also pos- 
sessive pronouns, are the following : meu (minha), 
mine, teu (tuaj, thine, seu (ma), his, hers, noaao 
(nossa), ours, vosao (vaasa), yours, ^ sens, stcas, 
theirs. 

3rd. The demomtrative adjectives or pronouns are 
so called because they show the objects to which 
they refer, as este (esta, istoj, this, aquelle (aqtiella^ 
aquilloj, that, esse, (essa, this, isso, it). 

To this class belong the words que, what, qital, 
which, qttem, whom, cujo, whose,^ called relative 
pronouns, because they refer to an object pre- 
viously named. 

These words, que, qual, quern, cujo, are also 
called interrogative pronouns, when used for in- 
quiry ; ex. : qus dizes tu ? what sayest thou P 

4th. Adjectives of quantity are those which 

^ The words in parenthesis are here only feminine yariations of 
the preceding prononns, and not themselves distinct possessive pro- 
nouns. They have their plnral by the addition of the a. 

^ Cujo^ whose, involves always the idea of possession, and may 
only be properly replaced by d$ que, de qual, d$ quern, of which, 
of whom, and the like. One may with propriety use the expres- 
sion Fedro cujo aciber eonhecet, Peter, whose knowledge you know 
. . . , in place of Fedro do qual eonheees o saber, Peter, of whom 
you know the learning . . . ; but it would be an error to say o 
hemem eujo eonheees, the man whose, or of whom, you know, in place 
of homem que tu eonheees, the man whom thou knowest. 



FOBTUGTTESE GRAMMAK, 13 

express nimiber or quantily, as um^ one, daus, two, 
primeirOf first, iodo, all, qualquer, whatever, etc.^ 

AUributwe adjectives are those which express 
qualities, as sdbiOy wise, prudente, prudent. To this 
class belong 

The Participles. Participles are certain adjec- 
tiyes which partake of the nature of the yerb 
from which they are derived, and of the adjective 
to the inflexions of which they are common; ex. : 
huvadOf praised. 

The inflexions of the adjective are six, that is, 
the signification, figure, clasSj gender, number, and 
the degrees of comparison. 

The signification may be natural, as eampo perde, 
green field ; or figurative, as verdes annos, advanced 
years. 

Ajb regards class, they may be either primitive, 
as amareUo, yellow, or derivative, as amarellado, 
yellowish. 

In respect to figure they may be simple, as 
humane, hnman, or compound, as deshumano, in- 
human. 

The gender and the nun^er of adjectives consist 
in the different terminations, which some change 

^ To ihe class of adfeetives ofguaniiiy belong numeral atyeeiiws, 
widch are those that expreas a certain number : thej are dirided 
into eardmalM and ordauUi. (See the Appendix.) 



14 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

according to the gender and number of the sub- 
stantives to which they are joined. 

The adjectiyes which end in o change into a 
when they are affixed to feminine nouns ; ex. : 
homem gordo, a fat man, mulher gorda, a fat woman. 
Those ending in ez, ol, OTy u, or um, have the addi- 
tion of an a ; ex. : um, one, uma. Commun, com- 
mon, is an exception, being inyariable. 

The attributive adjectives of every other termi- 
nation are unchangeable. 

The adjectives follow the same rules as sub- 
stantives in the formation of the plural, except- 
ing, however, those ending in il short, which is 
changed into eta ; ex. : facil, easy, faceis. 

The degrees of comparison are three, the 
positive, comparative, and superlative. 

The positive signifies simply a quality, as Pedro 
^ sabio, Peter is wise. 

The comparative expresses the quality of a noun 
as compared with another, as Pedro d mats sabio 
que Joao, Peter is wiser than John. 

The comparative is formed by placing before the 
positive one of the adverbs, mais, more, menos, less, 
or tarn, so, and after it the conjunction, qtie, than, or 
as ; ex. : Pedro d tarn sabio como Joao, Peter is as 
wise as John, or Pedro e menos sabio qm Joao, 
Peter is not so wise as John. 



P0RTUOX7ESE GRAMMAR. 15 

The superlative expresses the same quality as 
the positive, augmented as much as possible; ex. : 
Pedro ^ muito sabiOy Peter is most wise. 

The superlative is formed by preceding the posi- 
tive by the adverb muitOy most, or adding to its 
last consonant the termination issimo or issima; 
ex. : Maria i muito honesta, or honestissima, Maria 
is very or most honest; Pedro ^ muito douto, or 
doutissimo, Peter is very or most learned. 

Exceptions are the adjectives pio, pious, and the 
like, which makes ptissimo, and others which have 
the second superlative irregular, owing to their 
derivation from Latin or ancient positives, as 
fideUssimOy^ most faithfuL 

^ The saperlatiTeB in ittimo are not of yery ancient date in 
Portugese, since they were only brought into general use about 
the end of the fifteenth century. It was then that the writers who 
perfected or improyed the idiom of that tongue introduced them, 
as formed in the Latin, or by denying them from thence. And 
for this cause it is that for poMsaimOy most poor,— regularly formed 
from the Portuguese positiye, poire, poor, is met at times,— ^Mn^per- 
rtmo, poorest, directly deriyed from the Latin positiye, /la^pfr, poor, 
and that other like irreg^arities are to be noted. 

These positiyes, thus irregular, may be reduced to three princi- 
pal classes: 

Ist. Positiyes ending in oo or m, which form the superlatiye by 
changing the or m into ntiftiMO, fiwMM4i; ex.: vao, yain, foiiMnimo, 
yainest, MminiM, common, eornnmnistimo, commonest, ChrittaOy 
Christian, makes CfhrisiumiMtimOy most Christian. 

2nd. Positiyes in vel, which change the vel into Mmimo, as 
§mavely amiable, amaiUiMsiww, Nobre, noble, makes also nobilitsmo, 

3rd. Positiyes in s, which change it into MMtMo, as mijm». 



16 



POBTUOUESE OBAHHAB. 



The following adjectives have comparatives or 
superlatives differing from their positives : 



POSITITB. 


COXPABATITI. 


SUFBKLATITB. 


alto 


high 


ftfp^r^ higher 


iupromo higheit 


baixo 


low 


i^trior lower 


injlmo lowest 


bom 


good 


mdhor hotter 


Optimo heft 


mdo 


had 


peior wone 


ptuUno wont 


grwid$ 


great 


maioT greater 


mawimo greatest 


pequmo 


Utile 


mmor leeeer 


minima leaet 


intemo 


internal 


interior inner 


intimo innermoet 


extimo 


external 


ext^ior outer 

The Verb. 


oxtromo nttermoft 



The verb is a word which signifies affirmation, 
with the designation of mood, tense, number, and 
termination, corresponding to the person* 

It is divided into subsianiwe and a4jeciive verb. 

The verb substcmtwe is that which simply ex- 
presses affirmation, as Pedro i vivente, Peter is 
living. There is one only, which is the verb aer, 
to be. 

capahle, eapaeiitimo. From the same came proceeds the irregu- 
larity of the following superlatiyes : aeerrimo (from aer$^ hitter), 
hittcrest, amieiisimOf most friendly (from amifOf friend), aopurimOf 
roughest (from atpero), oeUberrimOf most i^mons (from ul$br$)^ 
diffloilUmOf most difficult (from diffleit), facUHmOf most easy (from 
/aeil)fJldelitsimo (from^/), faithful, humUlUno^ most humhle (from 
humilde)^ saoratistimo, most sacred (from sagradOf sacred), saiuber- 
rimo, most wholesome (from talubre), sapimtiaimo, wisest (from 
sabio) ; and others of the like kind. 



PORTUGUESE GBAlOfAR. 17 

The verb adjective is that which, besides the 
affinnatioii, expresses an affirmed thing or &ct ; 
ex. : Pedro vive, Peter lives. The verb adjective is 
divided into active and passive. 

The verb active expresses an action done by the 
subject, Pedro louva, Peter praLses ; it is divided 
into transitive and intransitive. 

A transitive verb is that which expresses an 
action referring to an object other than the agent; 
ex. : Pedro louva a JoaOy Peter praLses John. 

The intransitive verb, called likewise neuter, 
expresses an action which affects the subject 
which is the agent, as Pedro Jugiu, Peter fled.^ 

The transitiYe verb is subdivided into reciprocal 
and reflective. 

The reflective verb is that of which the action 
reverts to the same subject as that which is the 

^ It may be known whether a yerb be transitiTe or intransitiye, 
by adding to it as complement one of the words wte, itio, this, or 
aqvelle, aqueUoy that. If betwixt the verb and the words in ques- 
tion may be introduced any preposition, the yerb will be intransitiye, 
otherwise transitiye. For example, we may say deiso etU e wm 
com ngueiley I leaye this and go with that; the yerb deixar, to leaye, 
is then transitiye, becanse between it and the demonstratiye, eate, 
cannot be introduced any preposition; and the yerb tr, to go, is in- 
transitiye, because between it and the demonstratiye, aguelie, may 
be introduced a preposition. 

It should be obseryed that the preposition a, to, neyer can apply 
to this analysis, because it is frequently joined to the accosatiye of 
transitiye yerbs ; ex. : amor a Dem^ to loye God. 

2 



18 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

agent ; ex. : Pedro huva-ae, Peter praises Imn- 
self. 

The reciprocal verb is that which expresses an 
action, likewise reciprocal between its subjects; 
ex. : Pedro e Joao huvam-se um ao outro, Peter 
and John praise each other. 

The passive verb is that which expresses an 
action of 'which its subject is the object, as Pedro 
i huvado, Peter is praised. In Portuguese there 
are no passive verbs; their want is supplied by 
adding to the verb ser, to be, the participle passive 
or past of the active verbs ; ex. : JBu sou amado, I 
am loved, tu es amado, thou art loved, elle i amado, 
he is loved, and so on in other tenses. The 
passive action is likewise expressed by adding to 
the verb active the pronoun se (self), being the 
subject cause, and not person ; ex. : a casa quei- 
mon^se, the house burned, that is, foi queimada, was 
burned. 

The verbs ser, estar (to be), ter, haver (to have) , 
are styled auxiliaries, when they assist in the for- 
mation of the tenses of verbs; ex.: tenho louvado, 
I have praised. 

The declensions of verbs are ten, i.e. the signifi- 
cation, class, figure, voice, mood, tense, number, 
person, conjugation, and regularity. 

The signification of verbs may be either natural. 



PORTUGUESS GRAMMAR. 19 

as cultivar a terra, to cultiyate the earth, or figura- 
tiye, as cultivar a memaria, to improye the memory. 

Their class (especie) consists in hemg primitive, 
as chorar, to lament, or derivative, as choramingar, 
to squall. 

The figure consists in being simple, as gostar, to 
taste, or compound, as desgostar, to disgust. 

The voices in yerbs are the different forms 
whereby is expressed the actiye or passiye yerb. 

The moods are fiye, the infinitive, indicative^ con- 
ditional, subjunctive, and imperative. 

The infinitive expresses an action without de- 
claring the agent ; ex. : louvar, to praise. There 
is, howeyer, in Portuguese the peculiarity of using 
infinitiye personals; ex.: Barba Roxa Ihe persuadiu 
SEREM OS uleis desta fac$ao maiores que as difficul- 
dades, Barbarossa persuaded him that the profit 
of this act was greater than the difficulties^ 
(Freire). 

The indicative expresses an action actually 
effected, or effecting ; ex. : huvo, I praise. 

1 The infinitiTe personal is made use of : 1st. When (as in the 
example giy/en) the suhject of discourse differs from the finite yerh 
which it determines. 2nd. When the infinitiTe, serring as snh- 
ject, or attrihute of a verh, or the complement of a paragraph, 
is taken in a personal sense ; ex. : A vosta determinaqao de atbn- 

TUBABDBS VOSM peSSOa^ pOT B0C00BBBBDB8 2>t0, fot mut boUf JOJil 

resolution to risk your safety for the sake of the Lord was excellent. 



20 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

The conditional expresses an action whicli will 
take effect under certain conditions ; ex. : loumria 
86 gostasae, I would praise if I tasted. 

The subjunctive expresses an action dependent 
on another foregoing; ex.: duvido que te louvem, I 
am doubtful if they should praise thee. 

The imperative is the mood of command, as 
iouva, praise. 

The principal tenses are three, the present, pre- 
terite, future. 

The present expresses an action done at the 
moment it is annoimced ; ex. : louvo, I praise. 

The preterite expresses an action done at a time 
anterior to that when it is annoimced ; ex. : louvei, 
I praised. 

The future expresses an action which has to be 
performed after it is declared ; ex. : louvarei, I 
shall praise. 

The preterite and the future, as will be seen in 
the conjugations, are subdivided. 

The persor^ of verbs consist in the terminations, 
whereby are denoted the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd person. 

Conjugations are the systematic changes of 
terminations which the verb imdergoes in its 
different moods, tenses, numbers, and persons. 
There are in the Portuguese idiom three regular 
conjugations. To the first belong verbs ending 



PORTUGTJESE GRAMMAB. 21 

in ar; ex. : lauvar, to praise ; to the second those 
ending in er; ex. : comer, to eat; to the third the 
verbs ending in ir; ex. : partiry to depart. 

The verb pAr, to put, which originally was of 
the second, now forms a separate conjugation, 
which serves as rule for its compounds. 

Those verbs are styled regular, which change 
their terminations regularly, without any alteration 
of the radical letters ; this constitutes regularity. 

The letters are named radical, which occur before 
the last vowel of the present impersonal of the 
infinitive. The last of the radical letters is styled 
figurative ; ex. : fot«-VAR to praise. 

The letter (or letters) which follow ^efigurcUive 
is called the termination ; ex. : IouV'AR, Iouv-bi, 
to praise, I praised. 

Thesimple tenses of verbs are formed by chang- 
ing the termination of the present impersonal of 
the infinitive in the terminations of those tenses ; 
ex. : of louvar, by changing the termination ar, 
into 0, is formed louvo, I praise ; into ava, Umvava, 
I praised. 

The compound tenses are formed by some of 
the tenses of the verbs ter or haver (to have), and 
by the past participle of the verb to be conjugated, 
as will be shown practically in the following con- 
jugations. 



22 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

CONJUGATION 

Of the Verbs TER, to have, KA VER, to have. 

INFINITIVE MOOD. 

PRESENT TENSE (dCFERSONAL). 

Ter, to have. Haver, to have. 

FEBSONAL. 

Sing. Ter eu Sing. Haver eu. 

Teres tu, etc. Haveres tu, etc.* 

FBETEKPEBFECT COMPOUND DCFESSONAX. 

Ter tido, to have had. Ter havido, to have had. 

PERSONAL. 

S. Ter eu tido, etc. S. Ter eu havido, etc.* 

FUTUBE COMPOUND IMPEBSONAL. 

Haver de ter. Ter de haver. 

FUTUBE COMPOUND FEBSONAL. 

S. Haver eu de ter, etc. S. Ter eu de haver, etc.^ 

GEBXTND. 

Tendo, having. Havendo, having. 

OEBUND COMPOUND OF FBETEBITB. 

Tendo tido, having had. Tendo havido, having had. 

OEBUND COMPOUND OF FUTUBE. 

Havendo de ter, having to Tendo de haver, having to 
have have 

PABTICIPLE PAST. 

Tido, tida, had. Havido, havida^ had. 

^ The tenses of the Infinitiye, though existing in Portuguese, 
are not used ; it is therefore unnecessary to give the rest of the 
terminations of such tenses. 



PORTUGTJESS GKAMBiAB. 23 

INDICATIVE MOOD. 

PBSSSNT TBNSB. 

S. Ea tenho, I have. S. En hei, I baye. 

Tu tens, thon hast. Tu has, thon hast. 

Elle tern, he has. EUe ha, he has. 

F. N'os temos, we have. P. N'os hayemofi^ we liaye. 

Yos tendes, ye haye. Y6s hanaiB, ye haye. 

EUes teem, ^ey haye. JEDesliao, they haye. 

TBSTBRDCPEBPBCT. 

S. En tinha, I was haying. S. En hayia, I was haying. 

Tn tuihas, etc. Tn hayias, etc.^ 

Elle tinha Elle hayia 

P. Nos tinhanios P. N'os hayiamos 

Yos tinheis Yos hayieis 

Elles tinham. Elles hayiam. 



S. En tiye, I had. S. En honye, I had. 

Tn tiyeste, etc. Tn honyeste, etc. 

Elle teye EUe honye 

P. Nos tiyemos • P. Nos honyemos 

Yos tiyestes Yos honyestes 

Elles tiyeram Elles honyeiam 

PKBTBBPBBFBCT OOMPOUirD.' 

S. En tenho tido, I haye S. En tenho hayido, I haye 
had had 

Tn tens „ etc. Tn tens „ etc. 

Elle tern „ Elle tern 



yy 



^ When tiie English ecjoiTalent is identical in both mxifiaij 
Terbs it is needless to repeat it tibrooghont tiie tense; in like 
manner, and for a nearly similar cause, the first person iuii|rnlM' 
only of tiie "Rnglish Terbs is giren in each tense ; tiie gie, indicat- 
ing Aat there is no other deriation from tiie first person hot that 
of tiie prononn, and that of the rerhal terminations known to 



The preterpafect and the prateiperfect conqponnd on^^ht 



24 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

P. iN'os temos tido P. N6s temos havido 

Vos tendes ,, V6s tendes ,, 

EUes teem ,, EUes teem „ 

PBBTEBFLUFEBPBCT. 

S. Eu tivera, I had had 8. Eu houvera, I had had 
Tu tiveras, etc. Tu houveras, etc. 

EUe tivera EUe houvera 

P. 1^08 tiveramos P. Nos houveramos 
Vos tivereis Vos houvereis 

Elles tiveram EUes houveram 

PSETBBPLUPBBPBCT COMPOUND. 

S. Eu tinha tido, I had S. Eu tinha havido, I had 
had had 

Tu tinhas „ etc. Tu tinhas ,, etc. 

EUe tinha ,, EUe tinha ,, 



P. Nostinhamos,, P. Nostiohamos,, 

Vos tinheis „ Vos tinheis „ 

EUes tinham „ EUes tinham „ 



FUTURE IMPBBFBCT. 

S. Eu terei; I shaU have S. Eu haverei, I shaU have 
Tu teras, etc. Tu haveras, etc. 

EUe tera EUe havera 

not to be used promiscnously, as if synonymous; since the first ex- 
presses an action performed at a time entirely passed, and the 
second an action done in a period of time still existing, and is (as 
observed by the late Patriarch of Lisbon, p. 152 of the Glossary 
of French Words), " a preterite with succession of time and acts 
often repeated.'' The following example shows the different ap- 
plication of these two tenses: Hontem nao five notieias tuaSf e tenho 
tido par xmo dea^s d^ir ver-te; mat houve hontem tanta neve, $ hoje 
tern ehovido tanto, que nao tenho podido sahir^ " I yesterday heard 
' nothing from you, and therefore was desiring to go and see you ; 
but it snowed so yesterday, and to-day has rained so much, that I 
was unable to move out.'* 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 25 

P. Nos terdmos P. Nos hayeremos 

Vos tereis Vos havereis 

Elles terao EUes haverao 

FUTU&B DCFBBPBCT COMPOUND. 

S. Eu hei de ter, I shall S. Eu hei de haver, I shall 

have had have had 

Tu has de ter, etc. Tu has de haver, etc. 

EUeha „ EUe ha ,, 

P. Noshavemos,, P. Ifoshavemos,, 

Vos haveis ,, V6s haveis „ 

Elles hfio ,, Elles hfio ,, 

FT7TUBB FBBFBOT COMPOUND. 

S. Eu terei tido, I shall S. Eu terei havido, I shall 

have had have had 

Tu terds tido, etc. Tu terds havido, etc. 

EUeterd „ EUe terd „ 

P. N6s teremos „ P. N68 teremos „ 

Vos tereis „ Vos tereis ,, 

Elles terao „ Elles terao y, 

CONDITIONAL MOOD. 

S. Eu teria, I should have S. Euhaveria, I should have 

Tu terias, etc. Tu haverias, etc. 

EUe teria EUe haveria 

P. "Nos teriamos P. Nos haveriamos 

V6s terieis Vos haverieis 

EUes teriam EUes haveriam 

COMPOUND. 

S. Eu teria tido, I should S. Eu teria havido, I should 

have had have had 

Tu terias tido, etc. Tu terias havido, etc. 

EUe teria „ EUe teria „ 

P. Nos teriamos „ P. N6s teriamos ,, 

Vos terieis ,, V68 terieis ,, 

EUes teriam „ EUes teriam „ 



26 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

IMPERATIVE MOOD. 

FUTURE. 

S. Tern to, hast thou S. Ha ta, hast thou 

P. Tende T6a, have ye P. Havei v6s, have ye 

SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD. 

S. Que eu tenha, that I S. Que eu luija, Ibat I aay 
may have have 

Que tu tenhas, etc. Que tu hajas, etc. 

Que elle tenha Que elle haja 

P. Que nos tenhamos P. Que nos hajamos 

Que v6s tenhais Que v6s hajais 

Que elles tenham Que elles hajam 

PBBTBBDCPBRFBCT. 

S. Que en tivesse, that I S. Que eu houvesse, that I 
might have might have 

Que tu tivesses, etc. Que tu houvesses, etc. 

Que elle tivesse Que elle houvesse 

P. Que nos tivessemos P. Que nos houvessemos 

Que v6s tivesseis Que v6s houvesseis 

Que elles tivessem Que elles houvessem 

FSETEBFBBFECT COMFOUKD. 

S. Que eu tenha tido, that S. Que eutenhahavido, that 
I might have had I might have had 

Que tu tenhas tido, etc. Que tutenhashavido, etc. 

Que elle tenha ,, Que elle tenha ,, 

P. Que nos tenhamos,, P. Que nos tenhamos ,, 

Que v6s tenhais ,, Que v6s tenhais ,, 

Que elles tenham tido Que elles tenham ,, 

PSETBKFLUFB&FBCT COMPOUin). 

S. Que eu tivesse tido, that S. Que eu tivesse havido, 

I might have had that I might have had 

Que tu tivesses tido, etc . Que tu tivesses havido, etc 

Que elle tivesse ,, Que elle tivesse 



ff 



PORTUOUESE GRAMMAR. 



27 



P. Quenostiyesflemostido P. QuenostiyessemosliaYido 
Que vos tiyesseis ,, Que yos tiyesseis 



Que elles tiyessem 



>f 



Que elles tiyessem 



ff 



ft 



FUrtTBB I1CPBB7BCT. 



S. Se eu tiyer, when I S. Se eu houyer, when I 



shall haye 
Se tu tiyeres, etc. 
Se elle tiyer 
P. Se nos tiyermos 
Se yos tiyeides 
Se elles tiyerem 



shall haye 
Se tu houyeres, etc. 
Se elle houyer 
P. Se nos houyermos 
Se yos houyerdes 
Se elles houyerem 



FUTUBI IMPKBFBCT COKFOUHD. 



S. Se eu houyer de ter, 
when I shall haye 
had 
Se tu houyeres de ter 
Se elle houyer 
P. Se nos houyennos 
Se yos houyerdes 
Se elles houyerem ,, 



99 



tt 



>f 



S. Se eu houyer de hayer, 
when I shall haye 
had 
Se tu houyeres de hayer 
Se elle houyer ,, 
P. Se nos houyermos 
Se yos houyerdes 
Se elles houyerem ,, 



>» 
>> 



FUTUBI PBB7BCT C01CF0Uin>. 



8. Se eu tiyer tido, when S. 
I shall haye had 

Se tu tiyeres tido, etc. 

Se elle tiyer „ 
P. Se nos tiyermos,) P. 

Se yos tiyerdes „ 

Se elles tiyerem,. 



Se eu tiyer hayido, when 

I shall haye had 
Se tu tiyeres hayido, etc. 
Se elle tiyer „ 
Se nos tiyeimos „ 
Se yos tiyerdes ,, 
Se elles tiyerem 



9> 



28 FOBTUGXTESE ORAMMAB. 

CONJUGATION 

Of the Verbs SHE and ESTAR, to be. 

INFINITIVE MOOD. 

PBB8ENT nCPBSSONAL. 

Ser, to be Estar^ to be 

PEBSONAL. 

S. Ser eu, etc. S. Estar eu, etc.^ 

PRBTBBPBRFECT COMPOUND DCPBBSONAL. 

Ter sidO; to have been Ter estado, to have been 

PBBTBBPBKFBOT COMPOUND PBB80NAL. ' 

S. Ter eu side, etc. S. Ter eu, estado, etc.^ 

FUTVBB COMPOUND IMPBB80NAL. 

Haver de ser, to hare to be Haver de estar, to have to be 

PEBSONAL. 

S. Haver eu de ser, etc. S. Haver eu de estar, etc.* 

GBBUND. 

Sendo, being Estando, being 

OBBUND COMPOUND OF PBBTBBITB. 

Tendo side, having been Tendo estado, having been 

OBBUND COMPOUND OF FUTUBB. 

Havendo de ser, having Havendo de estar, having 
to be to be 

^ For these uniised tenses see note p. 22. 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 



29 



INDICATIVE MOOD.. 

PBBSlDfT. 



S. Eu sou, I am 
, Tu 6s, thou art 
Elle e, he is 

P. "Nob sonios, we are 
Vos sois, ye are 
EUes sao, they are 



S. Eu estou, I am 
Tu est^, thou art 
Elle estd, he is 

P. N6s estamos, we are 
Y6s estais, ye are 
Elles estSo, they are 



PBBTBBDfPERFBCT. 

S. Eu era, I was S. Eu estaya, I was 
Tu eras, etc. Tu estavas, etc. 

Elle era Elle estaya 

P. Nos eramos P. Nos estayamos 
V6s ereis Vos estayeis 

Elles eram Elles estayam 



FBBTBKPERFBCT. 



S. Eu fui, I was 
Tu foste, etc. 
EUefoi 

P. Nos fomos 
Yos fostes 
EUes foram 



S. Eu estiye, I was 
Tu estiyes, etc. 
Elle esteye 

P. Nos estiyemos 
Vos estiyestes 
Elles estiyeram 



PUSTBBPBRFBCT COMPOUND. 



etc. 



S. Eu tenho sido, I haye S. Eu tenho estado, I haye 
been 

Tu tens 

Elle tern 
P. Nos temoB 

Vos tendes 

Elles teem 



been 
etc. Tu tens 

EUe tern 
P. N'os temos 
Vos tendes 
Elles teem 

PBETEBPLTJPEBPBCT. 



S. Eu fora, I had been, 

Tu foras, etc. 

Ellefora 
P. N'os f oramos 

Vos f oreis 

Elles foram 



S. Eu estiyera, I had been, 

Tu estiyeras, etc. 

Elle estiyera 
P. N'os estiyeramos 

Vos estiyereis 

EUes estiyeram 



30 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 



PBBTBBFLTJPBIIFBCT COMPOUND. 



S. Eu tinlia sido, I had S. Eu tinlia estado, I had 





been 


been 






Tu tmhas ,, etc. 


Tu tinhas „ 


etc. 




Elle tiTiha „ 


Elle tiTiha „ 




P. 


Nos tinhamos ,, 


P. N6s tinhamos ,, 






Vos tinheis „ 


Vos tinheis ,, 






EUes tinham ,, 


EUes tinham ,, 






FUTUBB 


nCPBBFBCT. 




s. 


Eu serei, I Rhall be 


S. Eu estarei, I shall be 




Tu seras, etc. 


Tu estaras, etc. 






Elle sera 


Elle estard 




p. 


Nob seremoB 


P. Nos estaremos 






Vos sereis 


V6s estareis 






Elles serfio 


Elles estarSo 






FUTUBB DCPBBPBCT COMPOUND. 




s. 


Eu hei de ser, I shall 


S. Eu hei de estar, 


I shall 




have been 


have been 






Tu has „ etc. 


Tuhaa „ 


etc. 




Elle ha „ 


Elle ha „ 




p. 


Noshavemos,, 


P. !N'6s havemos „ 






Vos haveis „ 


V6s haveis ,, 






Elles hao „ 


EUes hao „ 






FUTUBB PBB7BCT COMPOUND. 




s. 


Eu terei side, I shall 


S. Eu terei estado, 


I shall 




have been 


have been 






Tu teras side, etc. 


Tu terds estado, 


etc. 




Elle terd „ 


Elle tera ,, 




p 


. Nosteremos,, 


P. Nos teremos „ 






Vos tereis „ 


Vos tereis „ 






Elles terao „ 


Elles terao ,, 





CONDITIONAL MOOD. 

S. Eu seria, I should be S. Eu estaria, I should be 
Tu seriaSy etc. Tu estarias, etc. 

EUe seria EUe estaria 



PORTUGUESE OBAliMAR. 31 

P. Nos seriamos P. Nos estariamos 

Vos serieis Vos estarieis 

Elles seriam Elles estariam 

COMPOUND. 

S. Eu teria sido, I should S. Eu teria estado, I should 

have been have been 

Tu terias sido, etc. Tu terias estado, etc. 

P. Elle teria „ P. EUe teria „ 

Nob teriamos , , !N^6s teriamos , , 

Vos terieis „ Nos terieis „ 

Elles teriam ,y EUes teriam ,, 

IMPEEATIVE MOOD. 

FUTT7BE. 

S. Se tu, be thou S. Esta tu, be thou 

P. Sede vos, be ye P. Estai v6s, be ye 

SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD. 

S. Que eu seja, that I S. Que eu esteja, that I 
may be may be 

Que tu sejas, etc. Que tu estejas, etc. 

Que elle seja Que elle esteja 

P. Que nos sejamos P. Que nos estejamos 

Que vos sejais Que vos estejais 

Que elles sejam Que eUes estejam 

PBBTBBIMFEKPECT. 

S. Que eu fosse, that I S. Que eu estivesse, that I 
might be might be 

Que tu fosses, etc. Que tu estivesses, etc. 

Que elle fosse ' Que elle estivesse 

P. Que nos fossemos P. Que nos estivessemos 

Que vos fosseis Que vos estivesseis 

Que elles fossem Que eUes estivessem 

PBSTEBPEBFBCT COMPOUND. 

S. Que eu tenha sido, that S. Que eu tenha estado, that 
I might have been I might have been 

Que tu tenhas sido, etc. Que tu tenhas estado, etc. 
Que elle tenha „ Que elle tenha „ 



32 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

P. Que n68 tenhamos sido P. Que nos teuhamos estado 
Que Yos tenhais ,, Que yob tenhaiB ,, 

Que elles tenham ,, Que elles tenham „ 

PBBTBBfLUPBBFECT COMPOUND. 

S . Que eu tiYesse sido, that S. Que eu tiYesse estado, that 
I might haYe been I might haYe been 

Que tu tiYesses sido, etc. Que tutiYesses estado, etc. 

Que elle tiYesse „ Que elle tiYesse „ 

P. QuenostiYessemos,, P. QuenostiYessemos,, 

Que YOS tiYCsseis „ Que yob tiYCsseis „ 

Que elles tiYessem „ Que elles tiYessem „ 

PUTT7RE IHPBBPECT. 

S. Se eu for, when I shall 8. Se eu estiYcr, when I 
be shall be 

Se tu fores, etc. Se tu estiYcres, etc. 

Se elle for Se elle estiYer 

P. Se nos formos P. Se nos estiYcrmos 

Se y6s fordes Se yos estiYerdes 

Se elles forem Se elles estiYcrem 

PUTUBB IMPBBFEOT COMPOUND. 

S. Se eu houYcr de ser, S. Se eu houYcr de estar, 

when I shall haYe when I shall haYe 

been been 

Se tu houYcres de ser Se tu houYcres de estar 

Se elle houYcr „ Se elle houYer ,, 

P. Se nos houYcrmos „ P. Se nos houYermos „ 

Se YOS houYcrdes ,, Se yos houYerdes ,, 

Se elles houYcrem , , Se elles houYcrem , , 

FUTURE PEKPECT COMPOUND. 

S. Se eu tiYer sido, when I S. SeeutiYcr estado, when I 
shall haYe been shall haYe been 

Se tu tiYcres sido, etc. Se tu tiYcres estado, etc. 

Se elle tiYer ,, Se elle tiver ,, 

P. Se nos tiYermos „ P. Se nos tiYermos ,, 

Se YOS tiYcrdes „ Se yos tiYerdes „ 

Se eUes tiYcrem ,, Se elles tiYcrem ,, 



PORTUOITESE GRAMMAR. 33 



CONJUGATION 

Of the Verbs LOTJVAR, to praise, COMER, to eat. 

To serve as rule or model for the regular verbs of the 
first and second conjugation. 

INFINITIVE MOOD. 

PRESBNT IMFBB80NAL. 

Louvar, to praise Comer, to eat 

PB&BONAL. 

S. Louvar eu S. Comer eu * 

Louvares tu, etc. Comeres tu, etc. 

FBETERFEBFBCT COMPOUND IMPEB80NAL. 

Ter louvado, to have praised Ter comido, to have eaten 

PERSONAL. 

S. Ter eu louvado, etc. S. Ter eu comido, etc.^ 

FUTURE COMPOUND IMPERSONAL. 

Haver de louvar, to have to praise 
Haver de comer, to have to eat 

FUTURE COMPOUND PERSONAL. 

S. Haver eu de louvar, etc. S. Haver eu de comer, etc.^ 

GERUND. 

Louvando, praising Comendo, eating 

GERUND COMPOUND OF PRETEBITB. 

Tendo louvado, having praised 
Tendo comido, having eaten 

^ See note ante p. 22 regarding tenses not used. 

3 



34 



PORTUGUESE ORAMMAB. 



OBBUND OOMFOUKD OF PUTUBB. 

Havendo de louyar, having to praise 
Havendo de comer, having to eat 

PABTICIPLB PAST. 

Louvado, lonvada, praised Comido, comida, eaten 

INDICATIVE MOOD. 



PBBBBNT. 



S. En lonvo, I praise 
Tn lonvas, etc. 
Elle louva 

P. N6s louvamos 
V6s lonvais 
EUes lonvam 



S. En como, I eat 
Tn comes, etc. 
EUe come 

P. !N^6s comemos 
V6s comeis 
Elles comem 



PBBTBBXMPBBPBCT. 

S. En lonvava, I did praise S. En comia, I did eat 
Tn louvavas, etc. Tn comias, etc. 

Elle louvava Elle comia 

P. N6s lonvavamos P. N"6s comiamos 

V6s lonvaveis Vos comieis 

EUes lonvavam Elles comiam 

PRBTBBPEKPECT. 



S. En lonvei, I praised 
Tn lonvaste, etc. 
Elle lonvon 

P. N6s lonvamos 
Vos lonvastes 
Elles lonvaram 



S. En comi, I eat 
Tn comeste, etc. 
Elle comen 

P. N6s comemos 
Yos comestes 
EUes comeram 



PBBTBBPBBPECT COMPOUND. 



S. Entenholonvado,Ihave S. En tenho comido, I have 



praised 
Tn tens 
EUetem 
P. N"6s temos 
Vos tendes 
EUes teem 



eaten 
etc. Tn tens 

EUetem 
P. N6s temos 
Vos tendes 
EUes teem 



etc. 



FOKTUGX7E8E OKAMMAB. 



35 



PBBTBBPLUPBBFECT. 



S. Eu louvara, I had 
praised 

Tn louyaras, etc. 

Elle louvdra 
P. Nos louyaramos 

Vos louvareis 

Elles louyaram 



S. Eu comera, I had eaten 

Tu comSras, etc. 
Elle comera 
P. !N^6s comeramos 
V6s com^reis 
Elles comeram 



PBBTBBPLUPEBFECT COMPOUND. 



S. EutiiihalouyadOylhad S. Eu tinha comido, I had 



praised 
Tu tiuhas 
EUe tinha 
P. N6s tinhamos 
Yos tinheis 
Elles tinham 



eaten 
etc. Tu tinhas 

Elle tinha 
P. Nos tinhamos y, 
Yos tinheis 
Elles tinham 



ft 



>> 



>f 



etc. 



i> 



FVTVRE nCPERFBCT. 



S. Eu louyareiy I shall 
praise 

Tu louyaras, etc. 

Elle louyard 
P. Nos louyaremoB 

Yos louyareis 

Elles louyanlo 



S. Eu comerei, I shall eat 

Tu comeras, etc. 
EUe comera 
P. Nos comeremos 
Yos comereis 
Elles comerao 



FUTUBX mPERFBCT 00MP0I7ND. 

S. Euheidelouyar,Ishall S. Eu hei de comer, I shall 
haye praised haye eaten 

Tu has de louyar, etc. Tu has de comer, etc. 

Elle ha „ Elle ha „ 

P. Noshayemos „ P. Noshayemos,, 

Yos hayeis „ Yos hayeis 

Elles hao ,. EUes hao 



91 



99 



99 



36 



FOBTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 



FUTUBB PBBPBCT COMPQUin). 

S. Eu terei louvado, I S. Eu terei comido, I shall 



shall have praised 
Tu terds louyado, etc. 
Elle terd ,, 
P. N68 teremos 
Yos tereis 
EUes terao 



ft 
t) 



yf 



have eaten 
Tu terds comido, etc. 
EUe ter£ ,, 
P. Nos teremos ,y 
Vos tereis 
Elles terfio 



99 
99 



CONDITIONAL MOOD. 



S. Eu louvaria, I should 8. Eu comeria, I should eat 
praise 



Tu louyarias, etc. 
Elle louyaria 
P. N"6s louyariamos 
V6s louyarieis 
EUes louyariam 



Tu comerias, etc. 
Elle comeria 
P. N6s comeriamos 
Vos comerieis 
EUes comeriam 



COMPOUND. 



8. Eu teria louyado^ I 
should haye praised 

Tu terias louyado, etc. 

EUe teria „ 
P. N68teriainos,y 

Vosterieis ,, 

EUes teriam ,y 



S. Eu teria comido, I 
should haye eaten 

Tu terias comido, etc. 

EUe teria ,, 
P. Nosteriamos,, 

Vos terieis 



EUes teriam 



>9 

99 



IMPERATIVE MOOD. 



7UTUBB. 



8. Louya tu, praise thou 8. Come tu, eat thou 
P. Louyai yos, praise ye P. Comei yos, eat ye 

SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD. 

PRESENT. 

8. Que eu louye, that I 8. Que eu coma, that I may 
may praise may eat 

Que tu louyes, etc. Que tu comas, etc. 

Que eUe louye Que eUe coma 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 37 

P. Que nos louyemos P. Que nos comamos 

Que Yos louveis Que yob comais 

Que elles louyem Que elles comam 

PILBTBBIMFEBFECT. 

S. Que eu louyasse, that I S. Que eu comesse, that I 
might praise might eat 

Que tu louvasses, etc. Que tu comesses, etc. 

Que elle louyasse Que elle comesse 

P. Que nos louyassemos P. Que nos comessemos 

Que yos louyasseis Que yos comesseis 

Que elles louyassem Que elles comessem 

PBETBBPBBFECT COMPOUND. 

S. Que eu tenha louyado, S. Que eutenhacomido, that 
that I might haye I might haye eaten, 

praised 
Que tu tenhas louyado, etc. Que tu tenhas comido, etc. 
Que elle tenha ,, Que elle tenha ,, 

P. Que nos tenhamos ,, P. Que n6s tenhamos ,, 
Que yos tenhais ,, Que yos tenhais ,, 

Que elles tenham „ Que elles tenham ,, 

PBBTEBf LUPBBFBOT COMPOUIO). 

S. Que eu tiyesse louyado, S. Que eutiyesse comido, 
that I might haye that I might haye 

praised eaten 

Que tu tiyesses louyado Que tu tiyesses comido 
Que elle tiyesse „ etc. Que elle tiyesse „ etc. 
P. Que nos tiyessemos ,, P. Que nos tiyessemos ,, 
Que yos tiyesseis ,, Que yos tiyesseis 

Que elles tiyessem ,, Que elles tiyessem 






PUTUBB DCFBBFECT. 



S. Se eu louyar, when I S. Se eu comer, when I shall 
shall pndse eat 

Se tu louyares, etc. Se tu comeres, etc. 

Se eUe louyar Se eUe comer 



38 PORTUGUESE ORAMMAK. 

P. Se nos louvarmos P. Se nos comermos 

Se Yos louyardes Se yob comerdes 

Se elles louyaxem Se elles comerem 

FUTURE IMFBBFBCT COMPOUND. 

S. Se en houYer de loiiYar, S. Se eu houYer de comer, 

when I sliall haYe when I shall haYe 

praised eaten 

Se tn honYeres de lonYar Se tn honYeres de comer 

Se elle honYer ,, etc. Se elle honYer ,, etc. 

P. Se nos houYermos ,, P. Se nos honYermos ,, 

Se YOS honYerdes ,, Se yos honYerdes „ 

Se elles honYerem „ Se elles honYerem ,, 

FUTURE PERFECT COBfPOUND. 

S. Se en tiYer lonYado, S. Se en tiYcr comido, when 

when I shaU haYe I shall haYe eaten 
praised 
Se tn tiYeres lonYado, etc. Se tn tiYeres comido, etc . 

Se eUe tiYer ,, Se eUe tiYer „ 

P. Se nos tiYermoB ,, P. Se nos tiYermos ,, 

Se YOS tiYcrdes ,, Se yos tiYcrdes ,, 

Se elles tiYcrem ,, Se elles tiYerem ,, 



P0RTU6X7ESB GRAMMAR. 39 



CONJUGATION 

Of the Verb PARTIR^ to depart, to serve as model 
for the regular Yerbs of the third class; and of the 
Verb PORy to put, as example for its compounds. 

INFINITIVE MOOD. 

PSBSBNT IMFEBSONAL. 

Partir, to depart Por, to put 

PERSONAL. 

S. Partir eu, etc; 8. Por eu, etc.* 

PBBTBRPEBPBCT COMPOXmD DCPBRSONAL. 

Ter parddo, to have departed 
Ter posto, to have put 

PBBSONAL. 

S. Ter eu partido, etc. S. Ter eu posto, etc.* 

FUTUBB OOMPOUND DCPEBSONAL. 

Haver de partir, to have Haver de por, to have to 
to depart put 

FUTXTBB COMPOUND PSBSONAL. 

S. Haver eu de partir, etc. S. Haver eu de por, etc.* 

OBKUND. 

Partindo, departing Pondo, putting 

OEBUND COMPOUND OP PIBTEBTTB. 

Tendo partido, having departed 
Tendo posto, having put 

> See note ante on Infinitive Mood tenses. 



40 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

OEHriTD COMPOUND OF FUTT7BB. 

Havendo de partir, having to depart 
Havendo de por, haviag to put 

PABTICIFLE PAST. 

Partido, partida, departed Posto, posta, put 

INDICATIVE MOOD. 

PBBSSNT. 

S. Eu parto, I depart S. Eu ponho, I put 
Tu partes, etc. Tu poes, etc. 

EUe parte Elle pde 

P. Nob partinios P. Nos pomos 
VoB partis V6s pondes 

EUes partem Elles poem 

PRSTEBIMFEllFBCT. 

S. Eu partia, I departed S. Eu punha, I put 
Tu partiasy etc. Tu punhas, etc. 

EUe partia Elle punlia 

P. N6s partiamos P. N6s punhamos 
V6s partieis V6s punheis 

EUes partiam EUes punham 

PBBTBBPBSFBCT. 

S. Eu parti, I departed S. Eu puz, I put 
Tu partiste, etc. Tu pozeste, etc. 

EUe partiu EUe poz 

P. Nos partimos P. Nos pozemos 
Vos partistes Vos pozestes 

EUes partiram EUes pozeram 

PBBTB&PBBPBCT COMPOUND. 

S. EutenhopartidOylliaYe S. Eu tenho posto, I have 
departed put 

Tu tens ,, etc. Tu tens y, etc. 

EUe tern „ EUe tern 



ff AAUO TOIU ,, 



PORTUGXTESB GRAMMAR. 41 

P. Nob temos partido P. N6s temos posto 

Vos tendes „ Yob tendes „ 

Elles teem ,, Elles teem ,, 

PBETEBPLUPERFECT. 

S. Eu partira, I had de- S. Eu pozera,^ I had put 
parted 

Tu partiras, etc. Tu pozeras, etc. 

Elle partira Elle pozera 

P. 1^08 partiramos P. Nos pozeramos 

Yos partireis Vos pozereis 

Elles partiram Elles pozeram 

PRETBBFLUPEBFEOT COMPOUND. 

8. Eutinha partido, I had S. Eu tinha posto, I had 
departed put 



Tu tinhas 
Elle tinha 
P. ISTos tinhamos 
Vos tinheis 
EUes tinham 



etc. Tu tinhas 

Elle tinha 
Nostinhamos 
Vos tinheis 
Elles tinham 



etc. 



FUTURE nCPEBPECT. 

S. Eu partirei, 1 shall de- S. Eu porei, I shall put 
part 

Tu partiras, etc. Tu por^, etc. 

Elle partira Elle pord 

P. Nos partiremos P. N6s poremos 

Vos partireis Vos poreis 

EUes patirSo Elles porfio 

FUTUBX IMPEBPECT OOMFOUND. 

S. Euheidepartir, Ishall S. Eu hei de por, I shall 
have departed have put 

Tu has de partir, etc. Tu has de por, etc. 

Elle ha „ Elle ha „ 

P. Noshayemos,, P. Noshavemos,, 

Vos haveis „ Vos haveis „ 

Elles hao „ EUes hao 

> Aadpmara; yide Consttticio, Gr. Noiit. 



42 FORTUOUESB 6BAMMAK. 

FUTVRB PEBFBCT COMPOUND. 

S. Eutereipartido, Ishall S. Eu terei posto, I shall 
have departed have put 

Tu terds partido, etc. Tu terds posto, etc. 

Elleterd „ EUe terd „ 

P. NosteremoB ,, P. Nosteremos,, 

Vos tereis ,, V6s tereis ,, 

EUesterfio ,, Ellesl^rao „ 



CONDITIONAL MOOD. 

S. Eu partiria, I should S. Eu poria, I should put 
depart 

Tu paxtiriaSy etc. Tu porias, etc. 

Elle partiria Elle poria 

P. Nos partiriamos P. Nos poriamos 

Vos partirieis Vos porieis 

Elles paxtiriam Elles poriam 

OOBCPOUND. 

S. Euteriapartido, I should S. Eu teria posto, I should 

have departed have put 

Tu terias partido, etc. Tu terias posto, etc. 

Elle teria ,, Elle teria ,, 
P. N'osteriamos ,, P. iNosterianios,, 

Vos terieis „ Vos terieis ,, 

Elles teriam ,, Elles teriam „ 

IMPERATIVE MOOD. 

PUTURB. 

S. Parte tu, depart thou S. Poe tu, put thou 
Part( v6s, depart ye Ponde vos, put ye 

SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD. 

PBBSENT. 

S. Que eu parta, that I S. Que eu poiiha,'that I 
may depart may put 

Que tu partas, etc. Que tu ponhas, etc. 

Que eUe parta Que eUe ponha 



FOBTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 43 



P. Que noB partamos P. Que nos ponliamos 

Que vos paitais Que yos ponhais 

Que elles partam Que elles ponham 



PKBTEBIMPBBFECT. 



S. Que eu partisse, that I S. Que eu pozesse, that I 
might depart might put 

Que tu paribisseSy etc. Que tu pozesses, etc. 

Que elle partisse Que elle pozesse 

P. Que nos partissemos P. Que nos pozessemos 

Que YOS partisseis Que vos pozesseis 

Que elles partissem Que eUes pozessem 



FBSTEBFBKFECT COMPOUND. 



S. Que eu tenha partido, S. Que eu tenha posto, that 
that I might have I might have put 

departed 
QuetutenhaspartidOy etc. Que tu tenhas posto, etc. 
Que elle tenha „ Que elle tenha ,, 

P. Que nos tenhamos ,j P. Que nos tenhamos f, 
Que vos tenhais ,j Que vos tenhais ,, 

Que elles tenham ,, Que elles tenham ,, 

PKBTBBPLtJPEaPECT COMPOUND. 

S. Que eu tivesse partido, S. Que eu tivesse posto, that 
that I might have I might have put 

departed 
Que tu tivesses partido Que tu tivesses posto 
Que elle tivesse „ Que elle tivesse „ 

P. Que nos tivessemos „ P. Que nos tivessemos ,, 
Que vos tivesseis ,, Que vos tivesseis 

Que elles tivessem „ Que elles tivessem 






FUTURE IMPERFECT. 



S. Se eu partir, when I S. Se eu pozer, when I shall 
shall depart put 

Se tu partires, etc. Se tu pozeres, etc. 

Se elle partir Se elle pozer 



44 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

P. Se nos partirmos P. Se n68 pozermos 

Se voB partirdes Se vos pozerdes 

Se elles partirem Se elles pozerem 

PUTT7BS IMPBBFECT COMPOUND. 

S. Se eu houver de partir, S. Seeuhouverdep6r,wheii 

when I shall have de- I shall have put 

parted, etc. etc. 
Se tu houveres de partir Se tu houveres de por 

Se elle houver ,, Se elle houver „ 

P. Se noshouvermos,, P. Se nos houvermos „ 

Se vos houverdes ,, Se vos houverdes „ 

Se elles houverem , , Se elles houverem , , 



FfJTTJBB PESFBCT COMPOUND. 

S. Se eu tiver partido, S. Se eutiverposto, when I 

when I shall have shall have put 
departed 
Se tu tiveres partido, etc. Se tu tiveres posto, etc. 

Se elle tiver „ Se elle tiver „ 

P. Se nos tivermos ,, P. Se nos tivermos „ 

Se vos tiverdes „ Se vos tiverdes ,, 

Se elles tiverem „ Se elles tiverem „ 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 45 



THE IRREGULAR VERBS. 

Verbs are called irregular which by variation 
of the radical letters, or by irregularly changing 
their terminations, deviate from the rules of the 
verbs of their own conjugation. 

Before treating of the irregular verbs of each 
conjugation, the following rule common to all is 
given : Compound verbs are cor^'ugated as the simple 
verbs of which they are compounds. 

First Conjugation. 

The verbs which terminate in car change into 
qu the c, when it is followed by the letter e; ex. : 
ficar, to fix, Jique, fiqueiy etc. 

The verbs ending in gar are increased by u 
after the ^, in the persons wherein the letter e 
follows ; ex. : julgar, to judge, julgueiy julgue. 

The verb dar, to give, is also irregular in some 
or all of the persons of the following tenses : 
Indicative, Present. Dou^ d&s, d& ; damos, dais, 
dao. Preterperfect. Dei, deste, deu ; d^os,dSstes, 
deram. Pluperfect. Dera, deras, dera; deramos, 
dereis, deram. Subjunctive, Imperfect. D^sse, 



46 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

dSaaes, dSsse; Mssemos, desaeis, dissem. Future. 
DeVy deres, der; dermoa, derdes, derem} 

Second Conjugation. 

The verbs whicli terminate in geVy change into 
j the gy when that is followed by the letter a or o ; 
ex. : eleger, to choose, ekjOy eleja^ etc. 

The verb per der y to lose, forms perco in the 1st 
person present of the Indicative ; and perca, 
percaSy percOy percamos, percais, percam, in the 
present of the Subjunctive. 

Valer, to be worth, forms valhOy in the Subjunc- 
tive present, valha, valhas, valha, valhamos, valhaisy 
valham. 

CreTy to believe, makes in the Indicative present 
creio, crfes, cr6, cremos, credeSy creem ; and in the 
Subjunctive present creiay creiasy creiay creiamos, 
creiais, creiam. In like manner is conjugated the 
verb leVy to read, and its compounds. 

^ In regard to the mode of conjngatmg the verbs ending in tar, 
there are yarions methods in use ; ex. : some say eu me glorio ; 
others, eu me gloreio. The first have the undoubted advantage of 
never forming an irreg^ar verb ; but as good authority is found 
for both modes, certainty on the point is scarcely possible ; it will 
therefore suffice to indicate the following verbs as those whereof 
the present tense is formed by the ignorant only, in our opinion, in 
no: avarieiar, to covet, alumiar, enlighten, ampliar, amplify, 
annunciar, announce, copiar, copy, notieiar, notify, pronuneiar^ 
pronounce, renuneiar, renounce, prineipiar^ beg^, HtMar^ waver, 
varisTf vary, and others. 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 



47 



Poder, to be able, forms posso, in the first person 
present of the Indicative ; in the preterperf ect 
pude, -podeste, pdde ; podemos, podestes, poderam; 
and in the Subjunctiye present poasa, possas, posna, 
posaamos, poasais, poaaam. 

These verbs are regular in the tenses omitted, 
and the same is to be observed in regard to the 
following verbs, which are here conjugated in the 
tenses wherein they have any irregularity : 

Bizer, to say. Fazer, to do. Trazery to bring. 

INFINITIVE MOOD. 

PA&TICIPLB PAST. 

Dito, dita, said Feito^ etc., done Trazido, etc., brought 

INDICATIVE MOOD. 





PBEBBNT. 




DijfOy I say 


Fa^Oy I do 


Trago, I bring 


DtzeSf etc. 


Fazea, etc. 


lYazea, etc. 


Di% 


Faz 


Traz 


Liumoa 


Fazemoa 


lYazemoa 


DiteiB 


Fazeia 


Trazeia 


D%%em 


Fazem 

PBETBBFEBPBCT. 


IVazem 


Disae 


Fiz 


Trouxe 


DiaaeaU 


FizeaU 


TrouxeaU 


Diaae 


Fez 


Trouxe 


Diaaemoa 


Fizemoa 


Trouxemoa 


Diaaeatea 


Fizeatea 


Trouxeatea 


Dtaaeram 


Fizeram 


Trouxeram 



48 



FOBTXTGUESE GBAHMAR. 





PLVPBAFBCT. 


Distera 


Fiz&ra 


Trouxera 


Disseras 


Fizeras 


Trouxeras 


D%89era 


Fizera 


Trouxera 


Disseramoa 


Fiz&ramos 


Troux&ramos 


Disterets 


Fizereis 


Trouxereis 


Dtsaeram 


Fizeram 

FUTUBB. 


Trouxeram 


Direi 


Farei 


Trarei 


Dirds 


Fords 


Trards 


JHrd 


Ford 


Trard 


Diremof 


Faremos 


Traremos 


Dtreis 


Fareis 


Trareis 


Dirao 


Farao 


Trarao 




CONDITIONAL 


MOOD. 


Diria 


Faria 


IVaria 


IXrias 


Farias 


Trarias 


Diria 


Faria 


Traria 


Diriamos 


Fariamos 


Trariamos 


Dirieis 


Farieis 


IVarieis 


Diriam 


Fariam 


Trariam 




SUBJUNCTIVE 


MOOD. 




PBB8BNT. 




Diga 

Digas 

Diga 

Digamos 

Digais 

Digam 


Faga 

Fagas 

Faga 

Fagamos 

Fa^ais 

Fagam 


Traga 

Tragas 

Traga 

Tragamos 

Tragais 

Tragam 




IMPBBFBCT 


• 


Dissesse 


Fizesse 


Trtmxesse 


Dissesses 


Fizesses 


Trouxesses 


Dissesse 


Fizesse 


Trouxesse 


Dissessemos 


Fizessetnos 


Trouxessemos 


Dissesseis 


Fizesseis 


TrtMxesseis 


Dissessem 


Fizessem 


Trouxessem 



FOBTCGXrESB OKAM3IAB. 



49 





FUTUBB. 




Dmmt 


l^zer 


Ihmxer 


Disserea 


Fimr99 


Thmxerei 


Disser 


Fi%0r 


Trouxer 


DissermM 


Fkermof 


TrouxermM 


Disserdet 


Fisserde9 


IV'Ouxerdet 


DUserem 


Fisurem 


Trouxerem 


Querer, to wish 


Saber, to know 


Ver, to see 



INFINITIVE MOOD. 

PABTIGIPIS PAST. 



QueridOf querida, Sdbido, tahida, 
wished known 



Visto, vitta, 
seen 



INDICATIVE MOOD. 

PBBSBNT. 



Quero 

Queres 

Quer 

Queremat 

Quereis 

Querem 

Quiz 

Quiseste 

Quiz 

Quizemot 

QuisBestes 

Quizeram 

Quizera 

Quizeroi 

Quizera 



Sei 

Sahei 

Sahe 

Sabemos 

Saheis 

Sahem 



Souhe 

SoubesU 

Souhe 

Soubemos 

Soubeste$ 

Sauberam 

PBXTXBPLUPEBFBCT. 

Soubera 

Sauberai 

Soubera 



Vejo 

Ves 

Ve 

Vemoe 

Vedee 

Veem 

Vi 

Viste 

Viu 

Vimae 

Vistes 

Viram 

vy-a 

Vyae 
VWa 



50 



FOBTBGUBSE GRAMMAR. 



Quiwramos 


Souheramos 


Vlramos 


QutMereis 


Sauhereis 


rirets 


Quizeram 


Sauberam 


Vlram 




SUBJUNCTIVE 


MOOD. 




PBSBBNT. 




Queira 


Saiba 


Veja 


Queiras 


Saihoi 


Vefoi 


Queira 


Saiba 


Vefa 


Queiramos 


Saibamos 


Vefamos 


Queirais 


Saibais 


V&fais 


Queiram 


Saibam 


Vtjam 




IMFBBFBCT 


• 


Quizesse 


Soubes9e 


Vi%M 


Qui%esses 


Soubesses 


Visaets 


Qui%esse 


, Saubesse 


Vis»e 


Qui%essemo8 


8oube8semo8 


Vmemos 


Quizessets 


8oub$88eis 


Visseis 


Qui%esiem 


Soubessem 

FT7TUBB. 


Vissem 


Quizer 


Souber 


Vir 


Quizeres 


Souberes 


Vires 


Quizer 


Souber 


Vir 


Quizermos 


Soubermos 


Virmos 


Quizerdes 


Souberdes 


Virdes 


Qutzerem 


8<mberem 


Virem 



The verb cahevy to befit, forms caiho in the Ist 
person present of the Indicative, otherwise it is 
conjugated as the verb sahevy to know. Requerery 
to reqidre, forms requeiro, requeres, requer, in the 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 51 

Indicative present; and requeira, reqtmraa, re- 
queira; reqtmramos, requeirais, requeiram, in the 
Subjunctive ; otherwise it is regular. 

Third Conjugation. 

The verbs ending in ir, with e after the figura- 
tive letter when that is g, p, r, t, or v, change it 
into i in the 1st person present Indicative, and in 
all the persons of the Subjunctive present. Of this 
the verb deapir, strip^ is example, making in the 
present Indicative diapOy despes^ despe ; despimos, 
despis, despem ; and in the Subjunctive present 
dispa^ dispas, dispa, dispamos, dispais, dispam. In 
the other tenses it is regular, and likewise the 
verbs adherir, to adhere, advertir, advert, assentir, 
assent, competir, compete, conferir, confer, dea- 
mentir, belie, ferir, wound, mentivy lie, progredir, 
progress, reflectiVy reflect, aentir, feel, which are 
conjugated in the same mode. 

Those terminating in gir, change the g into J 
before a or o; ex. : fingir, feign, jftnjoy fif\fa, fir^faa, 
etc. 

Those ending in guiry without the u being 
sounded, lose it before o or a; ex. : seguir, follow, 
aigoy aigtty aigaa, etc. 

Those ending in hir lose the A, and preserve the 
i before o or a; ex. : cahir, fall, caio, caia, etc. 



52 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

Those tenmnating in zir are now irregular in 
the 3rd person singular of the Indicative present; 
luzir, to shine^ and canduzir, conduct^ for example, 
form conduz, luz, instead of luze, conduze. 

The verb cobrir or cubrir, to cover, forms in the 
Indicative present cubro, cobrea, cobre, etc. ; in the 
Imperative cobre ; and in the Subjunctive present 
cubray cubras, cubra; cubramos, cubrais, cubram ; 
in the other tenses it is regular. 

The verbs acudir, to help, bulir, boil, construir, 
construct, cuspivy spit, destruir, destroy, enguKr, 
engulph, fugir, fly, aacudiry shake, sumivy sink, 
toBsiry cough, are conjugated in the same manner, 
and form cospesy deatroeSy etc. 

MediVy to measure, forms mego in the 1st person 
Indicative present, and megay megas ; megamoSy 
megaiSy megam in the Subjunctive. 

In like manner are conjugated the verbs ouvivy 
to hear, pediry ask, impediry hinder, and despedivy 
dismiss. 

Miry to laugh, in the Indicative present forms 
rio, ris, n', rimos, rides, riem; in the Imperative 
riy ride; and in the Subjunctive m, rias, ria; 
riamosy riaiSy nam; otherwise it is regular. 

/r, to go, vir, to come, are conjugated in the 
following way. 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 



63 



INFINITIVE MOOD. 







PRESENT IMPEB80NAL. 






/r, to go 




Vir, to come 








PBRflONAL.^ 






Ir eu 




Yir eu 

OBBX7ND. 






Indo, going 




Vindo, coming 








PABTICIPLB PAST. 






IdOf gone 




Vindo, Vinda, ( 


3ome 






INDICATIVE MOOD. 






S. Vau 


P. 


Imos or S. Venho 


P. 


Vimoa 


Vats 
Vat 




vamos 
Ides Vena 
Vao Vem 

PBBTEBIMPBBFBCT. 




Vindea 
Vem 


S. la 
las 
la 


P. 


lamos S. Vin?ia 
leia Vinhaa 
lam Vinha 

PBETBRPBBFBCT. 


P. 


Vinhamoa 

Vinheia 

Vinham 


S. Fui 
Foate 
Foi 


P. 


Fomos S. Vim 
Fostes Vieste 
Foram Veto 

PBETEBPLUPBRPECT. 


P. 


Viemoa 
Vieatea 
Vieram 


S. Fora 
Forai 
Fora 


P. 


Foramoa S. Viera 
Foreia Vieraa 
Foram Viera 


P. 


Vieramoa 

Viereia 

Vieram 



^ See note ante p. 22. 



54 



TOKrVOTTESE GBAHUAB. 







7UTT7BE. 




s. 


Irei 


P. Iremoi 8. Vw-ei P. 


Viremos 




Irds 


Ireis Virds 


Vireis 




Ird 


Lrao Vird 
CONDITIONAL MOOD. 


Virao 


s. 


Iria 


P. Iriamos 8. Viria P. 


ViriamoB 




Irias 


IrteU VirioB 


VirieiB 




Iria 


Iriam Viria 


Viriam 



IMPERATIVE MOOD. 
8. Vai tu P. Ide vda 8. Vm tu P. Vinde v6b 



8. Va 
Vas 
Va 



8. Fo»9e 
Fosses 
Fosse 



8. For 
Fores 
For 



SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD. 



FBBBENT. 



P. Tamos 
Vades 
Vao 



8. Venha 
Venhas 
Venha 



P. FossetMs 8. Viesse 
Fosseis Viesses 

Fossem Viesse 



FVTUBB* 



P. Formos 8. Vi^r 
Fordes Vieres 

Forem Vier 



P. Venhamos 
Venhais 
Venham 



P. Viessemos 
Viesseis 
Viessem 



P. Viermos 
Vierdes 
Vierem 



There are verbs whicli, besides the participle 
past regular, have another irregular, and this 
latter is frequently preferred in discourse; we 
indicate some of these, the knowledge of which 
appears most necessary. 



POBTUGUESE GRAMMAR. • 55 

Acceitar, to ace&pt, acceito Isentar, exempt, isento 

Annexar, annex, annexo Jiintar, add, junto 

Gaptiyar, captivate, captivo Limpar^ eUanee, limpo 

DescalQar, unshoe, descal^o Manif estar, manifeeto, man- 

Entregar, give up, entregue Matar, kill, morto [ifesto 

Enxugar, dry, enxuto OccultEtr, hide, occulto 

EsctLsar, excuse^ escuso Pagar, pay, pago 

Expre88ar,«^prM«, ezpresso Salvar, sa/oe, salyo 

Ezpulsar, expel, ezpulso Seccar, day, sScco 

Faitar, glut, faito Segorar, secure, segnro 

Gkistar, spend, gasto Soltar, release, solto 

Second Conjugation. 

Eleger, ehoose, eleito Morrer, die, morto 

Encher, fill (up)^ cheio Prender, take, pr^so 
Escrever, write, escripto Eomper, hreak, roto 
Incoirer, inew, incurso Suspender, suspend, sus- 

[penso 

ITiird Cotyugation. 

Abrir, open, aberto Extingair, extinguish, ez- 

Affligir, afflict, afflicto Frigir, fry, frito [tdncto 

Cobrir, cover, coberto Imprimir, print, impresso 

Ezhaurir, ftrA^MM^, exliansto InBerir, insert, inserto 

Expellir, expel, ezpulso Tingir, dge, tinto 



56 PORTUGUESE ORAMMAR. 



OF DEFECTIVE VERBS. 

Verbs are called defective which are wanting 
in certain voices ; of these is example, the verb 
feder^ to smell strongly, which is never used in 
the persons where the d is followed by the letter 
a or 0. 

Brandir^ to brandish, colorir, to colour, compellir, 
compel, demoUr, demolish, expellir, expel, repelUvy 
repel, aubmergir, submerge, are likewise defective, 
because, according to many grammarians, they 
ought only to be used in the persons in which the 
letter i follows the figurative or radical letters. 

When these verbs have only the 3rd person 
singular, they are called impersonal; such are the 
verbs chover, to rain, nevar, to snow, amanhecer, 
dawn, and others. 

The verb prazer, to praise, is not only defective, 
but irregular in the following persons ; praZy 
prouve, prouvdra, prouvesse, prouver. 

OF THE PREPOSITION. 

Prepositions are unchanging words which serve 
to indicate the relations that things have between 
them ; ex.: livro de Pedro, Peter's book. The 



PORTU6T7ESE GRAMMAR. 57 

de expresses relation of possession, indicating that 
the book belongs to Peter. 

Prepositions are the words a, to, ante, before, 
apds, after, aU, until, com, with, contra, against, 
de, of, desde, from, em, in, entre, between, para, 
for (by), per, through, por, by, sem, without, sob, 
under, sobre, above, and others expressing rela- 
tions of place (for example, estive em Roma, I was 
in Srome, vou para Liaboa, I go to Lisbon), and 
figuratively others analogous, such as : 

Those relating to time, as, fez-se em duaa horaa, 

it was done in two hours. 
Those of concurrence or union, as, estive com Pedro, 

I was with Peter. 
Those of opposition, as, foi contra o costume, it was 

unusiial. 
Those of possession or origin, as, a luz provim do 

sol, light comes from the sun. 
Those of cause, as, obra por tnteresse, he works for 

his own profit. 
Those of means or instrumentality, as, elevourse 

pela intriga, he rose by intrigue. 
Those relating to object or end to, as, estudou para 

saber, he studied to acquire knowledge. 

OF ADVERBS. 

Adverbs are unchangeable words, joined to 
verbs and adjectives, to express the mode or cir- 
cumstances of their signification ; ex. : Pedro 
escreve bem, Peter writes well. 



58 POKTUGUSSE GRAMMAR. 

Sometimes adjectives are employed^ or certain 
plirases in place of adverbs ; ex. : Failou d'este 
ARTE, e VELOZ parttu, ^he spoke in tliis way, 
and left immediately.' 

Adverbs are divided into different classes ac- 
cording to the circumstances to be expressed, that 
is to say : 

Of mode : bem, well, mal, badly, assim, thus, do 
mesmo modo, in like manner, como, as, facHmenie, 
easilv.^ 

Of time : aff&ra^ now, jd, already, logo, after, 
hqfe, to-day, dmanha, to-morrow, nunca, never, 
entao, then, quando, when, sempre, always. 

Of place: gd, here, aqui, there, acold, there, 
onde, where, longe, far, ahi, there. 

Of quantity : pouco, little, maia, more, menoa, 
less, muito, much, tanto, so much, quanto, as much 
as. 

Of affirmation : aim, yes, na verdade, in truth. 

Of negation : nao, no, de nenhum nwdo, in no- 
wise. 

Of doubt : talvez, perhaps, quigd, perhaps, por 
Ventura, by chance. 

Of exclusion: a6, only, apenaa^ scarcely, aAmente, 
only. 



^ A great many adyerbs of mode are formed by placing after 
the attributive adjective the termination mente; ex.: fielmmte, 
faithfully. Wlien the adjectives end in o, they change it into a, 
for the formation of theie adverbs ; ex. : iobiamentt, wisely. 



PORTUGUESE GRAMBiAR. 59 

OF THE CONJUNCTION. 

The Oonjunction is an nnyarying part of speecli, 
which serves to connect not only words but parts 
and periods of discourse ; ex. : Pedro i Joao sao 
sMoSy Peter and John are wise. 

There are different kinds of conjunctions^ the 
chief whereof are as follows : 

Copulatives : e, and, tambem, also (too), ^[ue, 
than, or as, itemy also, outro sim, besides. 

Disjunctives: ou, or, nem, nor, quer, whether, 
ara; now, ja, already, quando, when. 

Conditional : se^ if, nao, not, com tanto que^ if. 

Of cause : eomo, as, por quanta, for as much as, 
pais que, since, so much as. 

Of conclusion : pais, then, logo, therefore, par- 
tantOy then. 

Of opposition : maSy but» poreniy but, cam qwmtOy 
provided that, todatnUy nevertheless. 

OF THE INTERJECTION, 

The Interjection is a word whereby is expressed 
sudden movement or emotion of the mind. 

Those most in use are as follows: at, ah! to 
express pain or grief, oh! pleasure; ui! fear; ah! 
oh ! admiration ; ^ / to incite \ ta! to suspend, 
stop, 6! ix} call. 

Interjections are elliptical expressions, which 
are equivalent to entire sentences ; ai is the same 



60 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

as tenho ddr, I feel pain, ta, to, suspende, suspend 
(stop), and the same with the rest. 

In order to facilitate the practice of the rules 
given, and the comprehension of the principles 
laid down, an analysis of the f oUowing words is 
offered as example. 

JETontem recebi de Coimbra dom livros antigos, I 
yesterday received from Coimbra two very old 
books. 

Santem, yesterday, is an adverb to express the 
circumstance of the time when these books were 
received. 

Mecebi, I received, is a word to express affirma- 
tion, and is verb adjective, because besides the 
affirmation, it expresses an affirmed thing ; that is, 
that I was the recipient. And it is verb active, 
because it expresses an action done by the subject, 
and transitive, because the said action has, or 
passes to, an object distinct from the subject, 
which is the agent ; it is in its natural significa- 
tion, in order to correspond with its primitive 
idea; it is primitive, because it is not derived 
from any other word in Portuguese ; simple, be- 
cause divided it has no meaning; it is in the 
active voice, in order to express an action likewise 
active; in the indicative mood, for its action is 
actually performed ; in the preterperf ect, because 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 61 

it is done at a time anterior to that in whieli it is 
announced; it is in the 1st person singular, in 
order to agree with the pronoun eu, 1, understood 
by ellipsis; it belongs to the 2nd conjugation, 
because ending in ^ in the present impersonal of 
its infinitive; and it is regular, because it changes 
regularly its terminations without any alteration 
of the radical letters. 

Dcy of, is a preposition to indicate the relation 
of place whence the books were received. 

Coimbra is a substantive to intimate to us an 
object, and it is a noun proper, because that object 
is unique in its kind. It is in its natural meaning 
to correspond with its primitive idea ; it is primi- 
tive, because it is derived from no other word in 
the Portuguese idiom ; simple, for divided it 
means nothing ; in the singular, and could not be 
otherwise, because proper names in their natural 
acceptation have no plural, and by use considered 
feminine. 

Dou8, two, is a determinative adjective, because 
it limits the signification of its substantive, denot- 
ing its quantity, and is simple, primitive, and 
unchanging in its termination. 

Livros, books, is a substantive to intimate the 
objects, and noim appellative, because it may be 
referred to all of its kind; but in the present 



62 F0BTUGI7ESE 6BAMMAB. 

case limited to the number of them denoted by 
the adjective dom; it is in its natural acceptation, 
and it is primitiye and simple^ for use considered 
masculine, and in the plural, because naming more 
than one thing. 

Antigos, ancient (or very old), is an attributive 
adjective, in order to express a quality. It is, in 
its natural acceptation, simple and primitive. It 
is in the masculine, and in the plural, and positive, 
because expressing simply the quality, without 
comparison or preference. 

OF SYNTAX. 

Syntax is the part of grammar which teaches 
the correct composition of sentences. 

Speech, or proposition, is the expression of an 
opinion or affirmation. 

Opinion is the act of the mind, wherein we 
decide on the propriety of two ideas, as, for 
example, Pedro i sabio, Peter is wise. 

The proposition consists of three principal 
members, i.e. subject, verb, and attribute expressed 
or included in the verb, when this is adjective ; 
as, Pedro e vivente, ou Pedro vive, Peter is living. 

The subject is the person or thing spoken of; 
ex. : Pedro i sabio, Peter is wise. 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 63 

The subject of any sentence may be found by 
joining to the verb the interrogatiye quern, who ; 
ex. : qiiem i sabio, who is wise P The reply indi- 
cates Peter. 

The 9ub)ect is either complex or incompkx [ue. 
simple) ; it is incompkx when it is expressed by 
one word only (not including the article) ; ex. : a 
neve 6 branca, snow is white; it is complex when 
expressed by two or more words ; ex. : o Homem 
Benefico soccorre o indigente, the beneyolent relieye 
the poor. 

Not only substantives can serve as subject in 
discourse, but also any other parts of speech 
applied, with the article, as substantives; ex. : o ler 
^proveUoso, reading is beneficiaL • 

The attribute is that which is affirmed or 
denied of the subject ; ex. : Pedro i sabio, Peter 
is wise. 

The attribute (or the complement adjective) 
may be formed by joining to the verb the interro- 
gative que ? ex. : Pedro i . , . . o que f Peter is 
.... whatP The reply indicates aabio, wise, 
which in fact is the attribute. 

The attribute may also be complex or incom- 
plex ; and not only may adjectives serve as attri- 
bute, but likewise substantives ; ex. : Pedro 6 
Pastor, Peter is a Pastor (or Shepherd). 



64 PORTUGUESE 6BAMMAR. 

Finally the verb is the word whereby we affirm 
what the attribute requires of, or omits to convey 
to, the subject; ex. : Pedro i aabio, Peter is wise. 

Propositions (or sentences) may be either simple 
or compound ; simple are those which have but 
one sole subject and one sole attribute, i.e. when 
expressing but one sole affirmation or opinion; 
ex. : Pedro S sabio ; they are compoimd, when 
having more than one subject or attribute, i.e. 
when expressing more than one judgment or 
opinion ; ex. : Pedro e Joao sao sabios^ Peter and 
John are wise ; Pedro i sabio e modesto, Peter is 
wise and modest. The conjunction of many sen- 
tences, or even one forming a complete sense, is 
called a. period; when the period consists of more 
than one sentence, one of them is caHei principal, 
the rest subordinate. 

The principal sentence is that which of itself 
forms usually complete sense. Principal sentences 
are denoted by the Indicative, Conditional, or 
Imperative Mood, imless with a conjunction which 
renders them subordinate. 

Subordinate sentences are those which, of them- 
selves alone, do not form complete sense ; ex. : 
SE QUERES SABER, estuda, H you would acquire 
knowledge, study. These sentences, when they 
form part of others, are caHei partial. 



PORTUGUESE 6RAMMAB. 65 

Division of Syntax, 

Syntax is divided into three parts, i.e. govern- 
ment, agreement, and construction, and may be 
either regular or figurative. 

Kegular syntax is when neither the number 
nor the grammatical order of the words of a 
sentence be altered ; ex. : muitos homens sefizeram 
auctorea d^este homicidio, many were said to be 
concerned in that murder (Freire). 

It is figurative when the number or grammati- 
cal order of the words is changed ; ex. : muitos 
d*este homicidio sefizeram auctores. 

Of Crovemment. 

Government is the mutual dependence of the 
words of a sentence.^ Transitive verbs, preposi- 

^ This dependence in the Latin, and other tongues, is indicated 
hy means of the 0mm, which ar$ the different terminations whereby 
the toorde declined indicate their uee in the phrase or sentence ; ex. : 
JUius Petri (o JUho de PedroJ^ Peter's son. In this example the 
termination of the name Peter is changed, in order thus to indi- 
cate that it serves as complement to the word JUius, son, on which 
it depends, and hy which it is goyemed. In Portugaese the de- 
pendence is almost always expressed hy comhining the prepositions 
with the snbstantiyes, and, as it wonld be incorrect to call these 
combinations ensesy the name of complement is given to them, a 
name nndonbtedly very appropriate and expressive, since these 
eombinations complete and explain the sense of the words they 
govern. 



66 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

tions, and in general words of relative significa- 
tion/ require others to complete them. If, for 
example, we say Cesar venceu^ Cesar conquered, 
it is necessary to add a Pompeo, Pompey, or some 
one, without which the signification of the verb 
would remain incomplete. Consequently the 
verb, preposition, etc., are styled governing words; 
governed, whatever others serve as their comple- 
ment; and not only such may be the case with 
words alone, but even entire sentences. 

There are four kinds of complement : the objec- 
tive, the terminative, circumstantial, and restrictive. 

The objective complement is the word or words 
upon which falls directly the action of the transi- 
tive verb ; ex. : Pedro comprou um livro, Peter 
bought a book. When, however, the objective 
complement be the name of animals, or personified 
things, and is of the same number and person as 
the subject, it should always be preceded by the 
preposition a ; ex. : Pedro matou a Paulo, Peter 
slew Paul. 

The terminative complement is the word or words 
which, preceded by any preposition, serve as the 

^ 'Words of relatiTe signification are those which require a term 
which completes their meaning ; such are the adjectiyes igual, 
svperioTy etc., the yerbs dar, to giye,' attribuiry attribute, and 
otiiers, for which the objectiye complement is not sufficieut to com- 
plete their signification. 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 67 

indispensable terms to the relative signification of 
the governing words ; ex. : Joao deu um livro a 
PEDRO, John gave Peter a book. 

The circumstantial complement is the word or 
words which, preceded by any preposition, are 
joined to verbs and adjectives to express any 
circumstance of their signification ; ex. : Pedro 
estvda com cuidado, Peter studied carefully. 

The restrictive complement is the word or words 
which, preceded by the preposition de, of, limit or 
restrict the signification of the appellative preced- 
ing it ; ex. : par de zapatos, a pair of shoes. 

When the governing and the governed parts 
are all expressed, the government is regular ; 
when otherwise, ellipsis occurs, which will be re- 
ferred to hereafter. 

0/ Agreement. 

Agreement is the concordance resulting from the 
use of the adjective and verb' in the terminations 
corresponding to the gender, number, and person 
of their substantives or subjects. 

Adjectives ought to agree with their substantives 
in gender and number; ex. : homem sabio, mulheres 
virtuosos, a wise man, virtuous women. 

If the substantives should be two or more, and 
of different gender, the adjective, being an attri- 



68 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

bute, should be put in the plural masculine ; ex. : 
Pedro e Maria aao virtuosos, Peter and Maria are 
virtuous. But when the adjective is conjoined 
with substantives, as it were synonymous, it may 
agree with the nearest ; ex. : o amor e a amizade 
VERDADEiRA, OT a amizode e o amor verdadeiro, 
friendship and true love. 

When we make use of the appellations senhoruiy 
lordship, and the like, and have some adjective to 
agree with them, we ought to put it in the termi- 
nation corresponding with the sex of the person to 
whom, or of whom, we speak, so that the pronoun 
remain in the feminine ; ex. : 8tui Excellencia foi 
CASADO com Maria^ ou gasada com Pedro, ffis (or 
Her) ExceUency was married to Maria, or married 
to Peter. 

Nda, we, and vds^ ye, used in place of eu, I, and 
tu, thou, require the verb in the plural, but the 
corresponding adjective remains in the singular ; 
ex. : autes (nos) sejamos breve, que frolixo, we 
should be brief, rather than prolix {Barroa, Gram.). 

The verb ought to agree with its subject in 
number and person ; ex. : Pedro fugiu, Peter 
fled. 

The verb haver, to have, is an exception to this 
rule, when signifying ' to exiaty remaining always 
in the singular, even though the subject be of the 



POBTUOUESE GRAMMAR. 69 

plural ; ex. : annos houve em que os baptisados 
foram dom mil, in some years the numbers bap- 
tised amoimted to 2000 (Lucena). 

If there be two or more subjects, the verb is 
placed in the plural ; in the 1st person, if any of 
them shall be of the 1st person ; in the 2nd, if 
any be of the 2nd person ; ex.: eu e tu estamos 
bonSy you and I are good ; tu e Pedro estais bom, 
you and Peter are good. If, however, all should 
be of the 3rd person, the verb may either be put 
in the 3rd person plural, as, for example: subiram 
ao quarto da Duqueza de Mantua D. Miguel e Femao 
Telles^ Don Miguel and Fernando Telles repaired 
to the apartments of the Duchess of Mantua ; or 
in the third person singular, as, o p6 e o fumo 
AVisou a D. Joao da Costa, the dust and smoke 
forewarned Dom John da Costa.^ 

If the subject should be a collective partitive, 
followed by a noun, in the plural, the verb is also 
put in the plural ; ex. : parte dos nossoa inhnigoB 
FUGiRAM, part of our enemies fled. But if the 
collective be general, the verb must remain in the 
singular ; ex. : o exerciio dos inimigos retirou-se, 
the enemy's army retreated. 

These irregularities are explained by the system 
of figurative syntax, as will hereafter be seen. 

I Portugal re$tauradOy Edit. 1679, pp. 129 and 133. 



70 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

Of Construction. 

Construction is the combination of words in a 
sentence without alteration of their syntax ; con- 
struction may be direct or the reverse. 

Direct construction requires that the subject take 
the first place, then the verb, afterwards the attri- 
bute or objectiye complement, and the terminatiye 
or circumstantial complement, if any, the last, 
and that the words of modification have place 
after those modified ; ex. : D. Joao de Castro the 
iouvou e accendeu este brio com favores publicos, Dom 
John de Castro lauded his bravery and encouraged 
it by public demonstrations of favour. 

Inverse construction, on the contrary, demands 
that the verb be placed before the subject, the 
adjective before its substantive, and that other 
similar inversions be made ; ex. : este brio the 
Iouvou e accendeu D. Joao de Castro com favores 
publioos (Freire). 

The inverse construction is the most followed ; 
but it ought to be noted that the determinative 
adjectives should never be placed after their sub- 
stantives. Likewise no other adjective whatever 
ought to be drawn from its place, which by change 
of position would alter in signification; such is 
the adjective algun, any, some, which, placed be- 



PORTUGUESB GRAMMAR. 71 

fore or after its substantive, has meanings totally 
different : cotiaa algumUy signifies nenhuma, notliing ; 
alguma coma, anytliing, or the opposite. (N.B. 
The natural signification of these adjectiyes is 
usually indicated by their direct construction ; 
the figurative meaning by the reverse.) 

Of Figurative Syntax, 

Figurative Syntax is when, by means of the 
following figures, we omiiy increase, or transpose 
words in speech. 

Ellipsis is a figure whereby we omit in speech 
certain words which are easily imderstood ; ex. : 
d'onde vindes? whence comest thouP de casa, from 
home. In this reply are wanting the words eu 
venho de casa,^ I come from home. 

When we have to repeat a word already ex- 
pressed, and which may be easily understood, it is 
elegant to omit it ; an exception is, should there 
be any article, pronoun, or preposition which pre- 

^ In order to rednce to regular syntax the following example, 
estdt velhOf doente^ pobrsy yon are old, suffering, poor, it is neces- 
sary to repeat the yerb and say, tu eatds velho^ tu estda pohre^ tu 
estda doente, you are old, you are, etc., thus formrug three regular 
sentences. It is therefore obvious that continuous words, and 
those connected by expressed or understood conjunctions, form so 
many elliptical sentences, which may be reduced to regular syntax 
by understanding as omitted the words they lack. 



72 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

cedes words of an opposite meaning ; it would be 
wrong to say, meu Pai e Mai boo jd velhos, my 
father and mother are already aged, instead of, 
meu Pai e minha Mai sao Jd velhoa. 

Syllepsis is a kind of ellipse, whereby the verb 
or adjective is made to agree, not with the sub- 
stantives to which they are joined, but with 
others which we imagine, or which are understood ; 
ex. : Pedro e Mayna sao virtuosos^ Peter and Maria 
are virtuous. Virtuosos does not agree with Pedro 
nor Maria, but with the substantive entes, beings, 
understood by ellipse. 

Pleonasm is when a perfect and complete sen- 
tence is augmented by certain words to render it 
the more expressive ; ex. : eu o vi com os meus 
PROPRios OLHOS, I saw it with my own eyes. 

Hyperbole is when we transpose words in speech, 
separating the governed from the governing, the 
adjectives from their substantives, etc. ; ex. : eu 
cuido que da illustre Dio Ihe seri cada pedra 
um epitaphio mudo (Freire), I think that every 
stone will be a silent epitaph of the famous Dio. 

Analysis of the Proposition, 

1st example : Pedro 6 sabio, Peter is wise. This 
is a simple sentence to express one sole affirma- 



PORTUGUESE 6BAMMAR. 73 

tion ; its subject is Peter^ the person spoken of. 
The word e, is, affirms the co-existence of Peter 
with the quality expressed by the adjectiye sabiOy 
wise; it is for that end the verb. Sahio is the 
attribute to express the quality we affirm to belong 
to the subject, Peter. 

2nd: Pedro e Maria mo virtuosos, Peter, etc., are 
virtuous; a compound phrase, to express more than 
one affirmation ; it is equivalent to Pedro i 
virtuoso, Maria i virtuosa, Peter is virtuous, Mary 
is virtuous; phrases which are analysed like the 
preceding one. 

3rd: O justo so teme a Deus, the just only 
fear God. 

A simple phrase to express one sole judgment ; 
its verb adjective teme, fear, expresses briefly the 
co-existence of the subject Justo, just man, with 
the attribute temente, fearing, whose objective 
complement are the words a Deus, Gtod. 

Analysis of the Period. 

Example : Mandou JD. Joao 4^ ao Dr. Rodrigo 
Botelho, que assistia em Suecia, qtie passasse a Osna- 
bruck com os Plenipotenciarios que a Bainha mandasse 
d^aquelle Reino, D. John IV. commanded Dr. 
Bodrigo Botelho, then in Sweden, to repair to 



74 PORTUGUESE ORAMMAB. 

Osnaburgli with the plenipotentiaries whom the 
Queen was to send from that kingdom. 

This period or paragraph consists of four sen- 
tences, the 1st is the principal, not only because 
enunciated by the indicative mood, without a con- 
junctidh to subordinate it, but because, conjointly 
with its integrant (which is the 3rd), which serves 
it as objective 'complement, it forms a complete 
and independent sentence. The 2nd is an inci- 
dental explicative sentence, in order to explain 
and amplify the idea expressed by the words £. 
Botelho ; but forms no essential part of this idea, 
and for that cause may be omitted without chang- 
ing the meaning. The 3rd is, as was said, an 
entire sentence, because completing the governance 
of the verb mandau, ordered. The 4th is an inci- 
dental restrictive sentence, since it limits the 
signification of the word 'plenipotentiaries,' by 
restricting it to those whom the Queen of Sweden 
should send; and it cannot be omitted without 
altering the sense, since we could not say the 
plenipotentiariea without declaring who they were. 



POSTU6UZ8E OKAIOCAIL 75 



•PE080DY. 

Prosody is a part of grammar whicli teaches 
the pronimciatioii of words with their due sound 
and accent. 

Accent is the greater or less stress or eleration 
ai voice wherewith we pronounce the words re- 
presented by the foUowing signs or marks (^)9 {'\ 
(*)y entitled, the first grave accent, the second 
acute accent, the third circumflex, and the value 
whereof can only be orally learned* 

The syllables with acute accent or circumflex 
are commonly called long, the others short; and 
in nearly all words there is a long or predominant 
syllable, which may be the last, the last but one, 
or the one before that, but never one antecedent 
to that. To indicate which of these syllables 
should be predominant is one of the objects of 
I prosody. 

The words having the last syllable predominant 
i are: 

I let Those ending in i or ti, excepting quim, 

ahnost, in a mode, and trUm, tribe. 

2nd. Those ending in. So car m; excqyting orgSo, 
organ, bengSo, blessing, etc. ; except also the 
voices of the verbs (unless those of the future 



76 PORTUGUESE GBAMMAK. 

tenses), and words ending in em ; ex. : imagem, 
image. 

3rd. Those ending in /, excepting the adjectives 
in eel or il; ex. : docil, docile, amavel, amiable. 

4th. Those ending in r, excepting ambar, amber, 
nectar, nectar, etc. 

5th. Those which terminate in « or 2 when of 
the singular, for if of the plural they preserfe 
the quantity of their singular. 

The antepenultimate is predominant ; 

1st. With substantives which end in imo ; ex. : 
Optimo, best, bellissimo, most beautiful. 

2nd. The voices of the verbs terminating in 
mos; ex. : eramoa, we were, excepting those of the 
preterperf ect, future, and present. 

3rd. The substantives compounded of Greek 
roots ; ex. : philosopho, philosopher, excepting 
those ending in ia, as, for instance, philosophia, 
philosophy. 

The last syllable but one is predominant with 
all words in which the last or antepenultimate 
syllable is not predominant ; ex. : mrtude, virtue. 

Of Figuree of Speech, 

Figures of speech are used when, for euphony 
in pronunciation, we cut off, augment, or change 
letters in our phrases. 



FOBTU6TJESE 6BAMMAR. 77 

Letters are cat off: 

1st. By Apheerems in the begiimiiig of words ; 
ex. : lianga for alUanfa, alliance.^ 

2. By Syncope in the middle ; ex. : mar for 
maior, greater. 

3. By Apocope in the end ; ex. : sam for santo^ 
holy. 

Synalepha is when the last vowel of a word is 
suppressed, and supplies as it were the first vowel 
of the following sentence, this sign ('), or 
apostrophe, at times understood, taking the place 
of the suppressed voweL The preposition de^ of, 
almost always loses the ^, if followed by a vowel ; 
ex. : dOf of it, d^este^ of this, etc., for de o, de eate, 
etc. The pronouns tne, te^ Ihe, me, thee, it or him, 
lose also the e, when followed by the article a, the, 
or 0, the, without the substantive ; ex. : deram'^o 
for derani'MK'O, they gave it. 

Proihesis is when the word is increased by any 
letter ; ex. : deram-'so for deram-o, they gave it. 

Antithesis is when any letter is changed in a 

1 Almost all grammariaiis gire as eramples of ihis figure tiie 
words no, na^ n-etU^ etc., bat they seem to be in error. Li these 
words, whicb lonnerly were written em tio^ tm na, 0m nuUj etc., 
as may be seen in the Terj oldest docoments, eollected bj J. P. 
Bibeiro, in tiie Leal Cooselheiro, Vita Christi, etc., not cmly has 
there been no suppression of any letter, bat even tiie co n t rar y 
has been the ease, thos being examples of prothuU raflier than 
tipktgreHi, 



78 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

word, as in the voices of verbs ending in 8 or r, 
and followed by the article o or «, in which the 
« or r is changed into /; ex. : dal-o, to give it, 
louvamo'lo, we praise it, in place of louvamo8-o, 
dar-o. 

ORTHOGRAPHY. 

Orthography is the part of grammar which 
teaches the correct mode of writing words, and 
the use of punctuation. 

The orthography generally adopted is that 
which has for basis etymology and the derivation 
of words, and as this orthography can be effec- 
tively learned by the use of any good dictionary,^ 
we have now but to occupy ourselves with the 
following objects. 

The Use of Capital Letters, 

These should only be made use of : 

1st. At the beginning of periods (paragraphs), 

and after the points of interrogation, admiration 

or exclamation, terminating these. 

2nd. At the beginning of every verse of any 

^ The author of the Portagaese Compendium has puhlished an 
Essay upon Orthography, in which is a Yocahulary, that may in 
some measure supply the want of a Dictionary in regard to 
orthography. 



POBTUGUESE 6BAMMAB. 79 

poem, and also at tlie beginning of any sentence 
or saying we may cite ; ex. : Dizia Soracio ; min- 
gmm vive contente com a sua aarte, Horace said, no 
one lives contented with liis lot. 

3rd. At the beginning of proper or heathen 
names, of sciences or arts, dignities or profes- 
sions, of degrees, relationships, and others like 
to them, when they are taken in the personal 
and determinatiye sense, for example : meu Prima 
Luiz ^ digno de toda a estima, my cousin Louis is 
worthy of aU esteem; bnt not when speaking 
generally, for instance, os filhoa devem respeiiar sens 
pais, sons should respect their parents. 

On the Use of the Stephen. 

The hyphen (-), dash, or mark of connection, is 
nsed to divide words in their elements, especially 
or chiefly when any such word overpasses its own 
line, and goes partly to the next; in this case 
every care should be taken not to separate the 
letters forming syllables, and to note the f ollow- 
^ing rules: 

1st. Two consonants occurring in any word, 
one of them belongs to the preceding vowel, the 
other to that which follows : ex. : beUlo, hand- 
Bame,/or'te, strong. Exceptions are the consonants 
bl, br, elf and all those, which though joined to- 



80 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

gether, would be proper to commence a syllable, 
and which belong both to the vowel that follows ; 
ex. : a-brir, to open, a-dro, porch. 

2nd. Three or more consonants occurring, those 
which would be proper for the beginning of a 
syllable belong to the following vowel, the others 
to that preceding ; ex. : ac-clamar, to acclaim. 

3rd. When a consonant occurs between two 
vowels, it usually belongs to the vowel that follows 
it ; ex. : a-ve, hail ! An exQ^ption is the letter e, 
which belongs to the preceding vowel ; ex. : 
ex^ercito, army, ex-ecutar, to execute. 

4th. Two or more vowels occurring in any word 
may be divided, if not forming a diphthong ; ex. : 
sa-u-de, health. 

As exception to these rules, it should be noted 
that compound words ought to be divided into the 
simple words that compose them ; ex. : in-atidito, 
unheard, ad-mittir, to admit. 

The hyphen serves also to unite the pronouns 
me, te, Ihe, nds, vos, se, me, thee, etc., to the words 
whereto they serve as complements ; ex. : cumpre- 
no8, it behoves us, ensinar-te, to instruct you. It 
also serves to mark a break or pause in a sentence, 
and to indicate an emphasis on the word or words 
so isolated ; thus, in fact, almost taking its place 
in 



P0BTU6UESE GRAMMAR. 81 

PUNCTUATIOK 

Punettiatum is the art of indicating in writing, 
by means of certain signs, the pauses which should 
be made in reading, for the better understanding 
of the subject of discourse. 

These signs are the following : the comma (, ), 
sCTU-colon (;), colon (:), full stop (.), the point 
of interrogation (?), the point of exclamation (!), 

parenthesLB ( ), and reticence ( ). Briefly, 

in fact, punctuation in Portuguese is precisely the 
same as in French or English. 

Examples of the use of the comma , semicolon; 
colon : and period or full stop . are : Edudai^ dis 
Seneca f nao para saber, mais que as outras ; mas 
melhor que elks, I studied, said Seneca, not to know 
more than others, but better than they. Em 
Portugal teem reinado tres dynastias: a DyfuuUa 
Alfonzina; a ^AmZy e ade Braganga, three dynas- 
ties hare rrigned in Portugal, that of Alf onzo, 
thatof Aviz,andthatofBragan2a. Seasabedaria 
enirar em teu eorafSo, e a seieneia agradar a tua 
alma; o canselho te guardard, e a prudenda te eot^ 
servard. (Proverbio do SalomSo), When wisdom 
^itereth into thy heart, and knowledge is pleasant 
unto thy soul ; discretion shall preserre ibee, 
understanding shall keep thee : (Prorerbs of 
Scdomon). 



82 PORTUGUESE GILAMMAR. 

The point of interrogation is made use of at the 
end of sentences which express any inquiry ; ex. : 
Como, Senhores, sem mim pasaais a Dio ? (Freire), 
How, gentlemen, would you go to Dio without me ? 

The point of admiration, or rather of exclamation, 
is appUed to express sudden emotion, surprise, or 
comparison; ex.: Quanto ^ admiravela naturaleza/ 
How wonderful (or admirable) is nature ! 

The parenthesis serves to isolate any sentence or 
phrase which is inserted in the phrase, without 
being at all an essential part of it ; ex. : Joao 
Coelho Be offereceu ao Capitao Mor (a quem era 
siNGULARMENTE ACCEno), para tentar os mares 
(Freire), John Coelho offered himself to the 
Capitao Mor (by whom he was remarkably es- 
teemed), for service on the seas. 

The words in parenthesis should be read in a 
lower or altered tone of voice. 

Reticence, or the breaking off of parts of a 
sentence or dialogue, serves to denote a sudden 
suspension of what has to be said, and is expressed 
in reading by a certain peculiar pause, which may 
be better learned by oral instruction ; ex. : 

JEf verdade, ^ verdade, os anjos oifo 

Mas ^ dado aos mortales ouvir-W o canto (Socage). 

'Tis true, 'tis true, I hear the angels 

But mortals are allowed to hear their song. 



POBTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 83 

In the following stanzas of the Lusiad may be 
found examples of nearly all rules regarding 
pimctuation. 

Entrava a f onnosiBsinia Maria 
Pelos patemaes pagos sublimados, 
Lindo gesto, mas f 6ra de alegria, 
E seas olhos em lagrimas banhados : 
Os cabellos angelicos trazia 
Pelos ebumeos hombros espalhados, 
Diante do pae ledo, que a agasaiha, 
Estas palayras taes chorando espalha : 

Quantos povos a terra produziu 

De Africa toda, gente fera e estranha, 

grao Bei de Marrocos conduziu, 

Para vir possuir a nobre Hespanha : 

Poder tamanho junto nao se viu, 

Depois que o salso mar a terra banha : 

Trazem f erocidade, e furor tanto, 

Que a vivos medo, e a mortos faz espanto. 

Aquelle que me d^ste por marido, 
Por defender sua terra amedrontada, 
Go 'o pequeno poder ofFerecido. 
Ao duro golpe esta da maura espada ; 
E, se nao for comtigo soccorrido, 
Yer-me-has d'eUe, e do reino ser privada ; 
Yiuva, e triste, e posta em vida escura, 
Sem marido, sem reino, e sem ventura. 

Portanto, 6 Bei, de quem com puro medo 
corrente Mulucba se congela, 
Eompe toda a tardan9ay acude cedo 
A miseranda gente de Gastella : 
Se esse gesto, que mostras claro e ledo, 
De pae o verdadeiro amor assella, 
Acude, e corre Pai ; que se nao corres, 
Pode ser que nao aches quem soccoires. 

C. 3, B. 11. 



84 PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 

Thus rendered in English by Thomas Moore 
Musgrave (Canto 3, pp. 119-20) : 

The beauteous Maria camey 

Entering the Palace of her Ancestors 

"With sweetly sorrowful dejected mien— 

Her brilliant eyes suffused with streaming tears, 

"While o'er her neck, that vied with ivory, 

In snowy hue, flowed her angelic hair. 

"With joy her father clasp'd her to his heart, 

"When thus, with interrupting sobs and tears. 

She spake — '^ From all the furious Moorish States 

Of Africa, .a fierce and warlike host, 

The Monarch of Morocco hither leads, 

Noble Iberia to subjugate. 

Such numbers infinite have ne'er been seen. 

Since the salt waves first lash'd the sounding shore ; 

So great their fury and ferocity. 

They fill with fear the living, and the dead 

Perturb. The Prince to whom thou gav'st my hand, 

His menaced kingdom to defend, no means 

Possesses, nor can the fatal blow 

From the uplifted Moorish sword avert 

"Without thy aid, King, me thou wilt see. 

Of consort and of kingdom both depriv'd ; 

A widow mourning in obscurity — 

"Without her king, without her crown, and lost 

To happiness. My Eoyal Father, if 

Mulucha's streams at thy approach with fear 

Congeal' d, banish delay, and haste, haste. 

The overwhelm'd Castilian to relieve ; 

And if the joy, that in thy face now beams, 

Be a true sign of thy paternal love, 

Accelerate thy speed, — ^for, without haste, 

He whom thou would' st assist, may be no more." 



FORTUGUE8E GRAMMAR. 



85 



APPENDIX. 



Cardinal Numbers, 



Urn* 


One. 


Vinte e um 


Twenty-one 


Dois,dous Two 


Vinte dous 


Twenty-two 


Tres 


Three 


Trinta 


Thirty 


Quatro 


Pour 


Trinta e um 


Thirty-one 


Cinco 


Pive 


Quarenta 


Forty 


Seis 


Six 


Cincoenta 


Fifty 


Sete 


Seven 


Sessenta 


Sixty 


Oito 


Eight 


Setenta 


Seventy 


Nove 


Nine 


Setenta e um 


Seventy-one 


'Dez, des 


Ten 


Oitenta 


Eighty 


Onze 


Eleven 


Noventa 


Ninety 


Doze 


Twelve 


Noventaedous Ninety-two 


Treze 


Thirteen 


Gem or cento 


A hundred 


Quatorze 


Fourteen 


Duzentos 


Two hundred 


Quinze 


Fifteen . 


Trezentos 


Three hundred 


Desaseis 


Sixteen 


Mil 


A thousand 


Desanete 


Seventeen 


Dous mil 


Two thousand 


Desoito 


Eighteen 


Des mil 


Ten thousand 


Desanove 


Nineteen 


Cem mil 


A hundred thou- 


Vittte 


Twenty 


Um milhao 


A million [sand 



^ Spelt and pronounced at times Amui, and huma, the h being 
but slightly aspirated. 



86 



PORTUOUESE GRAMMAR. 



Fra>ctions. 

Meio Half Quinto Fifth 

Tergo Third Sexto Sixth 

Quarto Quarter, fourth etc. 



Multiple Numbers. 



Dobrado Double 
Triplo Triple 

Quadruple Fourfold 

TTma vezy once 



Onze vezes Elevenfold 
Centuple Hundredfold 

Dwu vasMy twice, etc. 



The Months, 



Janeiro 

Fevereiro 

Margo 

Abril 

Maio 

Junho 



January 
February- 
March 
April 
May 
June 



Julho 

Agosto 

Septembro 

Outubro 

Novembro 

Dezembro 



July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 



Days of (he Week. 



Domingo Sunday 

Segundafeira Monday 
Ter^a feira Tuesday 
Qua^ feira Wednesday 



Quinta feira Thursday 
Sexta feira Friday 
Sabbado Saturday 



Aprimavera Spring 
verfio or estio Summer 



outono 
invemo 



Autumn 
Winter 



PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 87 

^ A few Phrases and Familiar Expressions. 

Quer, so be it. 

Perto de meia noitSf near midnight. 
JE!i8, there ! 

A manhan, to-morrow. 
JEm tomOy round about. 
As avessas, the reverse. 
Cedo, soon. 

De caso pensado, designedly. 
De mamoy softly. 
De ear, by heart. 
Isto he, that is to say. 
Vai'te-emhora, begone. 
Qm ted ? what do you say of it ? 
! iSfw.' hush! 

Ai de mim ! alas ! 

Ao ammheeer, at sunrise. 

Trqjar a moda, to be dressed in fashion. 

Estou para partir, I am just off. 

B<m8 diaa senhor, good morning, sir. 

Agradicido, I thank you. 

Adeos men Senhor, farewell, sir. 

Vm. tern pressa, you are in haste. 

Muito aeu criado, your most humble serrant. 

j^ao tenha vm mSdo, fear not. 

Que tempo faz ? what sort of weather is it ? 

Fa&frio ? is it cold ? 

Tern vm. acdbado ? have you done ? 

Q^e quer f What do you want ? 

Mitende o f do you understand ? 

Nao sei, I do not know it. 

Andar d vela, to sail. 

Pagwr as cartas, to play at cards. 

Fulano entrou, so and so came in. 

Qm novas ha ? what news? 

Hum palavra, a word. 

Que vos parece, what do you think ? 

Que tern Vm, f what is the matter with you ? 

Estou pasmado, I am astonished. 



88 PORTUGUESE GBAHMAR. 

Como eatd f how are you ? 

Assim dttemy they say so. 

Quern Ihe disss a vm^* ? who told it to you ? 

JPegolhe perdao, I beg your pardon. 

Penso ntssOf I am thmking of it. 

Ihme sentido, take care. 

Sempre seu, entirely yours. 

Msu querido amigoy my d^r Mend. 

Q^e horas sao ? what time is it ? 

Eis me prompto^ I am ready. 

Como vets f how did you come ? 

Muito folgOf I am glad. 

Fallar em, to talk of it. 

Andar doente, to feel ill. 

Darfim, to conclude. 

Ter mao, to hold back. 

Passar hem, to be comfortable. 

Dor umpassetOf to take a walk. 

Fazer gentey to raise troops. 

Vou passandOyl'Bxxi. tolerably well. 

Tive que escrever, I had to write. 

Dor dia e hara, to appoint a time. 

E mister separar-n6s, we must part. 

A razaOy at the rate of. 

^do achOf I cannot find. 

Sefa, I consent. 

Tern razaOy you are right. 

Fu Wapego, pray do. 

Una duzitty a dozen. 

Una ventena, a score. 

Sim, SenhoTf yes, sir. 

Sinto caloTf I am very warm. 

Almogar avos, to breakfast on eggs. 

Mai bonitOf very fine. 

Quatro xelins o arratel, 4«. a pound. 

Chaperao, a big hat. 

Nuns nadaSf trivialities. 

maisy the rest. 



PORTUGXTESK GRAMMAR. 89 

Aiffum ditty some day. 

tal st^'eiio, the said person. 

Depregsa, promptly. 

yb ehao, on the ground. 

Logo-logo, at once. 

^Mtm-oMtm, qnite gently. 

SefUido, have a care. 

Do todo, quite. 

Assim tanto, rather. 

Caluial hush! 

Ora veja, only see ! 

Aqui tern, there are. 

Cifico harretes de dormir, five nightcaps. 

Una eapa, an envelope. 

Anao, a manikin. 

O horn do monge, the good monk. 

Dar OS parahens, to congratulate. 

Gosto de seu estylo, I like your style. 

CaUe-se, hold your tongue. 

Dai-mo, give it me. 

Um par, a pair. 

A metade, half. 

Some Contractions and AbbreciatioHS, 

C, eriado, servant. 

Dir for disier, to say. 

AA. for autores, author. 

Cap^' for eapitao, captain. 

2). for dom or don. 

Far for fazer, to do. 

A.^. for altexa real, royal 
Grao,gran,ioTgrandef great, D*'* for Deus^ God, [highness, 
/for tde, go. S. for santo, saint. 

2/<5r for maior, greater. M^- for mestre, master. 
Semos iorhavemos, weh&ve, Q^- for Quern, who. 
iV^^M MOMA, ours. Jb^M Manod, Emanuel. 

P^^ padre, &ther. L^*-^ Duarte, Edward. 

Q., que, who. Jtf^t mtiiAa, my. 



iSi**"* MitAor 


, sir. 


De forms eife. 


DtfM 




das. 


£ma 




na. 


Em 08 




no9. 


Para 




pela. 


Poras 




pelas. 



90 



PORTUGUESE GBAMMAB. 



Coinage of Portugal. 



SILYBB. 



Coroas (milreis or silver 

crown) 

Meias, (i), do. do. . . 

Orusados novos 

Half do 

Quarter do 

Testados 

Half do 

Vmtems 



8, d. 
= 1000Eeis«4 10 English. 



500 
480 
240 
120 
100 
50 
20 



-2 
=2 
«1 

n=0 

»0 
«0 
»0 



5 

H 

6 
3 
1 



i> 



»> 



}} 



»» 



ft 



if 



ft 



COPPBB COINAGE. 



40, 20, 10, 5, 3, li Reis. 



GOLD COINS. 

£ 

Dobraos s24,000Eeis»7 

Half do =12,000 „ =3 

One-fifth do. (moidore, 

pistole or lisbonine) = 4, 800 . , , =1 

Dobras =3 

Half do =1 

Quarter do «0 

Escudos =0 

Half do =0 

Old crusados =0 

Coroas d'ouro . .' =1 

Half do =0 



s. 


d. 












English 


15 







tt 


7 


or 


8«. 




14 









17 









18 


6 






9 


2 






4 


7 






2 


H 






4 


9 






12 


H 







PORTUGUESE GRAMMAR. 91 



A Business or other Communication. 



(To Senhoia F.) (from Senhoia G.) 

Che^o a panto de : se sum oeeupagoes The permit' 

tern de vir d minha easa, dar-lhe hei notidas com qus 

muito folgard. I have just arrived from : if you 

are at leisure to give me a call, I have news to impart 
that will afford you pleasure. 



THE EKD. 



BTBPHBM AUamr AlTD 801I8, FmillTmBS, HSBTTOKD. 



