33R 


[K'.Vu 
RMHH 


m 

Vv -'.••••  !i« vUuiMV,  ^  lU\  •  M 


A  GRAMMAR 


OF    THE 


PORTUGUESE   LANGUAGE; 


TO    WHICH    IS   ADDED 


Copious  SFocabuIan)  anU 


WITH 

EXTRACTS  FROM   THE  BEST  PORTUGUESE  AUTHOES. 


II          -w-y   T — •— 


BY  A.   VIEYRA. 

K  t 


NEW    EDITION,    REVISED 


BY 


A.   FEIXOTO,  K.C.C., 


PROFESSOR   OF   PORTUGUESE,   KING'S   COLLFGE,   LONDON  ; 

EXAMINER   TO   THE   CIVIL   SERVICE   COMMISSIONERS,   AND   TO  THE 

SOCIETY   OF    ARTS   AND   SCIENCES. 


LONDON:    DULAU    AND    CO.,    37    SOHO    SQUARE. 

SIMPKIN,   MARSHALL,  &   CO.,   STATIONERS'   HALL  COURT. 

1890 


MICROFILMED  BY 
UNIVERSITY  OF  "  CRCNTO 


UBR--.P.Y 


MASTER  NEGATIVE  NO.: 


LONDON: 

Printed  by  STRANGF.WAYS  &  SONS,  Tower  Street, 
Cambridge  Circus,  W.C. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE. 


As  the  usefulness  of  the  Portuguese  Language  is  so 
well  known  to  all  English  merchants  who  carry  on 
a  general  trade  with  the  different  parts  of  the 
known  world,  it  will  be  needless  to  use  any  argu- 
ments here  to  prove  it ;  and  I  shall  refer  what  I 
have  to  say  on  the  copiousness  and  energy  of  this 
language,  to  the  Preface  to  my  English  and  Portu- 
guese Dictionary. 

The  reader  will  find,  in  the  First  Part  of  this 
Grammar,  what  is  material  as  a  foundation  of  the 
whole. 

At  the  end  of  the  Second  Part  is  a  full  ex- 
planation of  the  Particles,  on  which  I  have  bestowed 
more  time  and  labour,  because  this  subject  has  been 
hitherto  much  neglected,  although  the  principal 
ornament  and  elegance,  not  only  of  the  Portuguese, 


IV  AUTHOR  S  PREFACE. 

but  of  every  other  language,  chiefly  consist  in  the 
proper  arrangement  and  judicious  interspersion  of 
the  words. 

In  the  Third  Part  is  a  larger  collection  than 
hitherto  published  of  the  terms  of  trade,  war, 
navigation,  &c.,  which  the  present  intercourse  be- 
tween the  nations  renders  particularly  useful. 

I  have  in  the  Fourth  Part  given  some  passages 
selected  from  the  best  Portuguese  Authors,  which 
will  facilitate  the  reading  of  their  most  eminent 
writers. 


CONTENTS. 


PART  I. 
CHAPTEE  I. 

PAGE 

Of  the  Portugese  alphabet       .        .        .        .        .        .        «  1 

Of  the  vowels .  2 

Of  the  consonants .        .  3 

Of  the  double  consonants 6 

Of  the  five  nasal  vowels ,   ,.  7 

Of  diphthongs.        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        «        .  8 

CHAPTER  II. 
Of  the  articles  9 

CHAPTEE  HI. 

Of  the  nouns   .        .        .        .         '. 11 

Of  the  adjectives      .        .        .        .        .        .         .        .        .19 

Of  numeral  nouns  ;  and  first,  of  cardinal       ....      22 

Ordinal  nouns 24 

A  method  to  learn  a  great  many  Portuguese  words  in  a  short 
time .26 

CHAPTEE  IV. 

Of  pronouns 28 

Of  personal  pronouns     ........      28 

Of  conjunctive  pronouns .        .      32 

Of  mixed  pronouns .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .33 

Of  possessive  pronouns  .        .        .        .  .  .      34 


VI 


CONTENTS. 


Eemarks  upon  the  possessives 
Of  the  pronouns  demonstrative 
Of  the  pronouns  interrogative 
Of  the  pronouns  relative . 
Of  the  improper  pronouns 


PAGE 

36 
38 
42 
44 
46 


CHAPTEE  V. 

Of  verbs 48 

Conjugation  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter,  or  haver,  to  have.         .  49 

Of  the  auxiliary  verb  haver    .        .         .....  55 

Conjugation  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ser,  or  estar,  to  be               .  56 

An  easy  method  of  learning  to  conjugate  the  Portuguese  verbs  62 

First  conjugation  of  the  verbs  in  ar 65 

Second  conjugation  of  the  verbs  in  er  .        .        .        .72 

Third  conjugation  of  the  verbs  in  ir  .        .        .        .77 

Of  the  irregular  verbs 81 

Of  neuter  verbs 116 

Of  reciprocal  verbs 117 

Impersonal  verbs 123 


CHAPTEE  VI. 
Of  the  participles 


134 


Of  the  adverbs 


CHAPTEE  VII. 


134 


Of  the  prepositions 


CHAPTEE  VHI. 


138 


Of  the  conjunctions 
Interjective  particles 
Abbreviations . 


CHAPTEE  IX. 


139 
141 
143 


CONTEXTS.  vii 

PART  II. 

CHAPTER  I. 

PAGl 

Of  the  division  of  syntax        .......  145 

CHAPTEE  II. 

Of  the  syntax  of  articles         .         .  .        .      .%        .  149 

CHAPTER  III. 

Of  the  syntax  of  nouns  ;  and  first  of  the  substantives    .         .  154 

Of  the  syntax  of  adjectives      .......  155 

Adjectives  which  come  after  the  substantives          .        .        .  156 

Of  the  syntax  of  comparatives  and  superlatives      .        ...  158 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Of  the  syntax  of  pronouns 159 

CHAPTER  V. 

Of  the  syntax  of  verbs 163 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Of  the  syntax  of  participles  and  gerunds         ....  177 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Of  prepositions J  79 

Of  further  particles         ........  207 

CHAPTER  VIH. 

Of  the  Portuguese  orthography ;  and  of  capitals  and  stops     .  219 

Of  the  accents        .         .         .        ."  .        .        .        .  220 

Some  observations  upon  the  Portugese  orthography      .         .  222 

Of  double  letters     . 231 

Of  the  quantity  of  syllables  and  their  sound  ....  242 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Etymology  of  the  Portuguese  tongue  from  the  Latin     .         .  248 


Till  CONTENTS. 

PART  III. 

Phraseology .  

Vocabulary  of  words  most  used  in  conversation 

Of  the  Portuguese  coin 

A  collection  of  Portugese  proverbs 

Familiar  dialogues        ..... 

Letters  on  business 


PART  IV. 

Several  useful  and  entertaining  passages 
Poetical  extracts    . 


395 
419 


A  NEW 
PORTUGUESE  GRAMMAR, 


PART  I. 
CHAPTER   I. 

OF  THE  PORTUGUESE  ALPHABET,  AND  THE  MANNER  OF 
PRONOUNCING  EACH  SEPARATE  LETTER. 

THE  Portuguese  alphabet  contains  twenty-five  single 
letters  and  five  double  consonants,  viz.:— 

A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  I,  J,  K*  L,  M,  N,  0,  P,  Q,  R, 
S,  T,  U,  V,  X,  Y,  Z. 

Of  these  the  following  five  letters  are  vowels  :— 

a,  e,  i,  o,  u. 

These  five  letters  are  pronounced  with  a  nasal  sound, 
when  there  is  a  cedilla  (")  over  them,  viz.  :— 

a,  e,  ?,  o,  u. 

The  following  are  the  five  double  consonants  :— 
ch,  Ik,  nk,  ph,  rr. 

*  K  has  been  adopted  in  the  Portuguese  alphabet  [ever  since 
the  first  (Barros's)  Portuguese  Grammar  was  printed,  in  1539]  for 
words  of  foreign  derivation  originally  written  with  it;  it  is  ex- 
pressed by  a  sound  like  that  of  the  ca  in  the  English  word  car,  if 
the  r  is  dropped  in  the  pronunciation  ;  its  power  is  the  same  as  in 
English. 

B 


VOWELS. 

OF  THE  MANNEK  OF  PRONOUNCING  THE  PORTUGUESE 

LETTERS. 

OF  THE  VOWELS. 

A 

in  Portuguese  is  commonly  pronounced  like  a  in  the 
following  English  words  : — adapted,  castle,  lath,  &c.  It  is 
sometimes  pronounced  with  less  strength,  and  closely,  as 
in  ambos,  both,  where  the  a  is  pronounced  like  a  in  the 
English  word  ambition. 

E. 

The  letter  e  has  two"*  different  sounds  :  the  one  open, 
like  ai  in  daily  ;  the  other  close,  like  that  in  the  English 
word  mellow.  Examples  of  the  former,  fe,  faith,  pe,  foot, 
<fcc.  Examples  of  the  latter,  rede,  a  net,  parede,  a  wall, 
&c.  In  this  consists  a  great  part  of  the  beauty  of  the 
Portuguese  pronunciation,  which,  however,  cannot  be 
learned  but  by  long  use,  notwithstanding  all  the  rules 
that  can  be  given. 


is  pronounced  like  ee  in  the  English  word  steel,  ac,o ;  or 
like  i  in  the  English  word  still,  ainda,  visible,  visivel. 

*  E  has  three  different  sounds  (the  same  as  the  French  e,  e,  e, 
respectively  corresponding  with  the  Portuguese  e,  e,  e)  :  no  notice 
has  been  taken  of  the  e  mute,  as  in  the  words  appetite,  appetite ; 
retrato,  portrait.  The  accent  (A)  in  the  words  rede,  parede,  is  used 
here  only  to  show  which  e  bears  the  second  or  close  sound  (the 
other  e  being  mute),  not  that  the  words  are  generally  written  with 
that  accent.  Indeed,  whenever  a  vowel  is  found  accentuated  in 
Portuguese,  the  proper  sound  of  the  accent  must,  of  course,  be 
given  to  it ;  but  the  student  must  not  expect  always  to  find  the 
respective  accents  on  the  vowels  whenever  any  such  sound  belongs 
to  them. 


CONSONANTS.  3 

0. 

This  vowel  has  two*  sounds :  one  open,  as  in  the 
word  do,  pity,  where  the  o  is  pronounced  like  our  o  in 
the  word  store;  the  other  close,  as  in  the  Portuguese 
article  do,  of,  and  the  word  redondo,  round,  where  the  o 
is  pronounced  like  our  u  in  turret  or  stumble.  It  is  like- 
wise in  the  different  pronunciation  of  the  vowel  that  the 
greatest  part  of  the  beauty  of  the  Portuguese  pronuncia- 
tion consists  ;  but  it  can  be  learnt  only  by  long  use. 

U. 

The  vowel  u  is  pronounced  like  oo  in  English. 


OF  THE  CONSONANTS. 

B 

is  pronounced  as  the  b  in  the  English  word  better. 

C 

is  pronounced  as  in  the  English  word  celebrated. 

Before  a,  o,  u,  and  the  consonants,  I,  r,  it  has  the 
sound  of  a  k;  but  before  e  and  i  it  takes  the  hissing 

*  The  Portuguese  0  has  three  different  sounds,  as  the  E,  and 
equally  accentuated  6,  6,  o:  the  first  is  open,  as  in  the  words  d6,  pity, 
topo,  I  hit  upon,  where  the  o  is  pronounced  much  like  the  English 
in  top ;  the  other  close,  as  in  topo,  top,  pdr,  to  place,  for  the  sound 
of  which  I  find  no  sound  equivalent  in  English ;  the  third  mute, 
as  in  the  Portuguese  article  do,  of,  and  the  final  unaccentuated  o 
ending  all  Portuguese  words,  where  its  sound  is  just  the  same  as 
in  the  English  verb  do,  or  the  preposition  to,  when  lightly  pro- 
nounced without  stress  or  emphasis.  In  the  word  redondo,  the  on 
somewhat  resembles  that  of  the  English  in  controversy,  and  there- 
fore bears  no  analogy  to  the  u  in  turret  or  stumble. 


4  CONSONANTS. 

sound  of  s,  and  also  before  a,  o,  u,  when  there  is  a  cedilla 
under  it,  thus  f . 

Double  c  is  sounded  only  before  e  and  c,  the  first  with 
the  sound  of  &,  and  the  other  with  the  hissing  sound  of 
s ;  as  in  the  word  acridente,  accident,  pronounced  aksi- 
dente. 

D 

is  pronounced  like  the  d  in  the  first  syllable  of  the  Eng- 
lish word  declared. 

F 
is  always  pronounced  as  in  English. 

G. 

Before  the  vowels  a,  o,  u,  and  before  consonants,  it  is 
pronounced  as  in  English :  examples,  ganancia,  gain ; 
repugnancia,  repugnancy. 

G  before  e  and  i  denotes  the  sound  of  j  consonant,  as 
in  the  English  word  generation. 

G  before  I  and  r  is  pronounced  as  in  English  :  ex- 
amples, gladiador,  gladiator ;  gruta,  grotto. 

Gua  is  pronounced  as  if  the  English  word  guard,  in 
Portuguese  guarda,  were  written  gward. 

Gue,  gui  are  pronounced  as  gue,  gi  in  the  words  guest 
and  gift ;  but  when  there  are  two  dots  on  the  u,  the  u  is 
then  pronounced  as  in  argiiir,  to  argue. 

H. 

This  letter  is  mute  in  Portuguese,  the  same  as  in  the 
English  words  honour,  heir,  and  is  preserved  in  those 
words  that  are  derived  from  the  Latin. 

J 

is  pronounced  like  the  j  in  English. 


CONSONANTS.  5 

K 

is  only  used  in  the  words  of  foreign  derivation  originally 
written  with  it. 

L. 

L  and  LI  are  pronounced  as  in  English. 

M 

is  also  pronounced  as  in  English. 

N. 
Also  as  in  English. 

P 

lias  a  sound  as  that  of  pe  in  the  English  word  penny. 

Q    .^'A,:\    •-'  .,,'.:-\ 

is  pronounced  like  k :  example,  quero,  I  am  willing,  pro- 
nounced kero. 

The  vowel  u  in  the  words  qual,  which ;  gualidade, 
quality,  &c.,  is  pronounced  as  in  the  latter  word. 

R 

at  the  beginning  of  a  word  is  pronounced  as  in  English 
in  the  words  rage,  rose,  rice,  &c.,  and  between  two  vowels, 
as  in  the  name  of  Sarah;  but  after  a  consonant  and 
before  a  vowel  it  has  a  strong  sound,  as  in  the  word 
enrich. 

S 

and  ss  are  pronounced  as  in  English. 

S  between  two  vowels  is  pronounced  like  a  z ;  par- 
ticularly in  the  words  ending  in  oso  and  esa,  as  amoroso 
cuidadoso,  mesa,  defensa,  &c. 


6  DOUBLE  CONSONANTS. 

T 

1ms  a  sound  like  that  of  ta  in  the  English  word  tame. 

V 

is  pronounced  as  in  English. 

X 

is  pronounced  like  our  personal  pronoun  she,  with  e$ 
added  to  it,  as  shees,  in  the  words  baixo,  low ;  paixcio, 
passion;  axioma,  axiom. 

X  after  the  vowel  e,  and  before  a  consonant,  is  pro- 
nounced like  is  in  the  words  extensdo,  extenuado,  expulso, 
excellente,  and  some  other  words. 

X  between  two  vowels  is  pronounced  like  iz,  as  in  the 
words  exactamente,  exornar,  exordia,  &c. 

X  at  the  end  of  a  word  is  pronounced  like  s,  as  in 
Felix,  simplex,  duplex,  &c. 

Y 

has  the  same  sound  as  an  i  in  the  English  word  visible, 
and  is  called  ypsilon. 

z 

is  pronounced  as  in  English ;  but  at  the  end  of  words  it 
is  sounded  like  s,  as  rapaz,  boy ;  Francez,  French ;  perdiz, 
partridge  ;  voz,  voice ;  luz,  light,  &c. 


OF  THE  FIVE  DOUBLE  CONSONANTS,  CALLED 
PROLACOES  IN  PORTUGUESE. 

CH 


is  pronounced  like  sk  in  the  English  word  shoe,  in  chegar, 
to  arrive  ;  achar,  to  find,  with  the  exception  of  architecto, 
monarcha,  &c.,  when  the  ch  has  the  sound  of  a  L 


NASAL  VOWELS.  7 

PH 

is  pronounced  as  in  English. 

LH 

is  pronounced  still  softer  than  the  /  in  the  word  punctilio. 

Ntf 

has  a  peculiar  sound,  of  which  there  is  no  equivalent  in 
English ;  it  is  pronounced  as  the  n  in  the  word  cognac 
in  French. 

RR 

is  only  made  use  of  between  two  vowels,  and  it  is  strongly 
sounded.* 


OF  THE  FIVE  NASAL  VOWELS. 

Words  with  a  nasal  sound  can  be  written  only  with 
the  cedilla  over  the  vowel,  thus :  a,  e,  ?,  o,  u,  or  with  m 
and  n  before  it ;  with  this  difference,  that  if  they  are  at 
the  end  of  a  word,  or  before  b,  p,  m,  they  must  be  written 
with  m,  and  in  all  other  cases  with  n;  as  in  the  words 
sdto,  santo;  soda,  sonda;  and  s£,  sim;  irma,  irmam  ;  tgpo, 
tempo. 

*  It  would  be  preferable  if  the  learned  in  Portugal  were  to 
follow  the  resolution  of  the  Koyal  Academy  of  Madrid,  by  expung- 
ing the  ph  and  placing  the  /in  its  stead,  as  in  the  words  meta- 
physica,  philosophia,  &c. ,  and  by  writing  c  instead  of  ch  in  the 
words  charidade,  charity,  choro,  choir,  when  it  is  pronounced  like 
a  k ;  also  by  replacing  the  ?  with  an  s,  since  they  have  in  both 
languages  the  same  hissing  sound,  and  by  omitting  altogether 
the  h  in  the  words  throno,  theatro,  and  many  other  modifications, 
already  adopted  by  some,  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  point 
out  in  the  course  of  this  work. 


DIPHTHONGS. 


OF    DIPHTHONGS. 

There  are  sixteen  diphthongs  in  Portuguese,  ten 
•which  are  vocal  and  six  nasal  ;  namely, 

VOCAL  DIPHTHONGS. 

di,  de,  as  in  pai,  or  pde,  father. 

do,  as  in  pdo,  a  stick. 

ei,  as  in  rei,  king. 

ei,  as  in  lei,  law. 

eo,  as  in  ceo,  heaven. 

eo,  as  in  meo,  or  men,  mine. 

io,  as  in  vio,  he  saw. 

6i,  6e,  as  in  heroi,  or  heroe,  a  hero. 

oi,  as  in  roido,  gnawed. 

ui,  as  mfui,  I  went. 

NASAL  DIPHTHONGS. 


«i,  ae,  as  in  mai,  or  7^a«,  mother. 

<io,  as  in  wzao,  hand. 

ee,  as  in  6e<?,  or  bem,  well. 

06,  as  in  pde,  or  poem,  poem. 

do,  as  in  600,  or  bom,  good. 

««*',  as  in  rui,  or  rwim,  mean. 


ARTICLES.  9 

CHAPTER  II. 
OF  THE  AETICLES. 

THOSE  particles  called  Articles  are  properly  preposi- 
tions, commonly  put  before  nouns,  to  show  their  gender, 
number,  and  case. 

These  articles  are  definite  or  indefinite. 

OF  THE  DEFINITE  ARTICLE. 

The  definite  article  marks  the  gender,  number,  and 
case  of  the  nouns  which  it  precedes. 

The  English  tongue  has  but  one  definite  article, 
namely,  the,  which  serves  for  both  numbers  and  genders. 

The  Portuguese  has  two,  viz.,  o  for  the  masculine, 
and  a  for  the  feminine. 

The  definite  article  has  five  cases,  the  nominative, 
genitive,  dative,  accusative,  and  ablative ;  because  the 
vocative  in  the  nouns  is  designed  and  preceded  merely  by 
the  interjection  oh. 

THE  DECLENSION  OF  THE  MASCULINE  ARTICLE  0. 
SINGULAR.  PLURAL. 

Nom.  o,  the  N.  os,  the 

Gen.    do,  of  the  G.  dos,  of  the 

Dat.    ao,  to  the  D.  aos,  to  the 

Ace.    o,  the  A.  os,  the 

Abl.     do,  from  A.  dos,  from  the 
„       pelo,  by  the  ,,    pelos,  by  the. 

Pelo,  pela,  &c.,  is  the  contraction  of  por  o  or  por  a,  <fec. 


10  ARTICLES. 

THE  DECLENSION  OF  THE  FEMININE  ARTICLE  A. 
SINGULAR.  PLURAL. 

Nom.  a,  the  N.  as,  the 

Gen.    da,  of  the  G.  das,  of  the 

Dat.    a,  to  the  D.  as,  to  the 

Ace.    a,  the  A.  as,  the 

Abl.    da,  from  the.  A.  a'as,  from  the. 

Observe,  that  the  Portuguese  have  an  article  for  each 
gender,  both  in  the  singular  and  the  plural. 

OF  THE  INDEFINITE  ARTICLE. 

.     f  m.,  urn, 
\  f.,  uma 

The  indefinite  article  is  declinable  in  the  same  way  as 
the  definite  article  :  examples,  a  house,  uma  casa ;  of  a 
horse,  de  um  cavallo  ;  by  a  road,  par  uma  estrada,  <fec. 

As  shown  above,  the  different  cases  are  governed  by  the 
respective  prepositions — viz.,  of,  de  ;  to,  a  ;  from,  de  ; 
and  by,  por. 

There  are  many  other  prepositions  of  which  we  shall 
speak  in  the  course  of  this  book. 

The  preposition  de  may  also  be  put  before  infinitives, 
and  then  it  signifies  to  ;  as  e  tempo  de  fallar,  de  dormir, 
de  ler,  &c.,  it  is  time  to  speak,  to  sleep,  to  read,  &c. 

When  the  verb  is  in  the  infinitive  mood,  and  serves 
as  nominative  to  the  following  verb,  put  the  definite 
article  o  before  it ;  as  o  comer  e  o  dormir  sdo  as  coisas 
mais  necessarias  rfesta  vida,  eating  and  sleeping  are  the 
greatest  necessaries  of  life. 

When  the  proposition  in  (em)  is  followed  by  the 
article  the  (o)  or  another  word  beginning  by  a  vowel, 
we  must  render  it  in  Portuguese  by  no,  or  nos,  for  the 
masculine ;  and  by  na,  or  nas,  for  the  feminine  :  ex- 
amples, in  the  garden,  72-0  jardim  ;  in  the  street,  na  rua ; 


NOUNS.  1 1 

in  thy  book,  no  teu  livro  ;  in  his  bed,  na  sua  cama,  <kc. 
Note  that  no  stands  for  em  o  ;  nas  for  em  as,  <fec. 

When  after  the  preposition  ivith,  which  in  Portuguese 
is  expressed  by  com,  we  find  the  article  the,  or  a  pronoun 
possessive,  as  with  the,  with  my,  &c.,  we  must  say,  com  o, 
com  a,  com  os,  com  as :  examples,  with  the  prince,  com  o- 
prindpe  ;  with  the  sword,  com  a  espada  ;  with  the  eyes, 
com  os  olhos  ;  with  my  books,  com  os  meus  livros,  &c. 

When  the  preposition  with  is  followed  by  a  pronoun 
possessive,  and  this  by  a  noun  of  quality  or  kindred,  as- 
with  your  majesty,  ivith  your  highness,  with  your  excellency, 
with  his  brother,  &c.,  with  must  then  be  rendered  by  the 
Portuguese  com,  as  com  vossa  majestade,  com  vossa  alteza> 
com  sen  irmdo,  without  using  the  article. 

Observe,  that  sometimes  the  dative  and  accusative  of 
the  indefinite  article  are  not  expressed  in  English,  par- 
ticularly before  pronouns  personal  and  proper  names : 
examples,  convem-nos,  it  behoves  us ;  Antonio  matou  a 
Pedro,  Anthony  killed  Peter. 


CHAPTER     III. 

OF  THE  NOUNS. 

THE  Portuguese  nouns  have  various  terminations,  as 
will  appear  hereafter. 

They  have  but  two  genders,  the  masculine  and  femi- 
nine. 

The  Portuguese  nouns  have  no  variation  of  cases,  like 
the  Latin;  the  article  only  distinguishes  the  case. 


1 2  NOUNS. 

\ 
OF    NOUXS    ENDING    IN    A  ;    AND    OF    THEIR    DECLENSION. 

SINGULAR.  PLURAL. 

N.  a  rainha,  the  queen  N.  as  rainhas,  the  queens 

O.  da  rainha,  of  the  queen  G.  das  rainhas,  of  the  queens 

D.  d  rainha,  to  the  queen  D.  ds  rainhas,  to  the  queens 

A.  a  rainha,  the  queen  A.  as  rainhas,  the  queens 

V.  oh  rainha,  0  queen  V.  oh  rainhas,  0  queens 

A.  da  ou  pela  rainha,  from  A.  das  ou  pelas  rainhas,  from 
or  by  the  queen.  or  by  the  queens. 

We  have  already  observed  that  the  Portuguese  nouns 
have  no  variation  of  cases  :  therefore,  there  is  no  occasion 
to  display  more  examples  of  their  declensions,  as  it  is 
•only  necessary  to  change  the  article  according  to  their 
gender. 

OF  THE  GENDER  OF  NOUNS  ENDING  IN  A. 

Nouns  ending  in  a  are  generally  of  the  feminine 
gender  ;  as  rosa,  rose ;  janella,  window,  &c.  Except 
dia,  day ;  planeta,  planet ;  and  other  nouns  ending  in 
a,  belonging  to  a  man ;  as  mariola,  rascal ;  jesuita, 
Jesuit :  those  derived  from  the  Greek  are  likewise  mas- 
culine ;  as  dogma,  epigramma,  clima ;  except  scientific 
names,  as  mathematica,  theologia,  &c. 

Except  also  from  this  general  rule  some  nouns  that 
have  the  accent  upon  the  last  syllable ;  as  alvard,  a 
charter,  or  a  prince's  letters  patent ;  Pard,  one  of  the 
captainships  of  the  Brazilian  empire. 

Observe,  that  the  plural  of  nouns  ending  in  a  is 
formed  by  adding  the  letter  s  to  the  singular;  as  likewise 
the  plural  of  all  nouns  that  terminate  in  vowels. 

Observe  also,  that  nouns  ending  in  da  are  of  the 
feminine  gender,  and  form  their  plural  like  those  ending 

in  a.* 

*  aa  IB  now  scarcely  used ;  <?  is  substituted  instead. 


NOUNS.  13 

OF  THE  GENDER  OF  NOUNS  ENDING  IN  E. 

Nouns  ending  in  e  are  generally  of  the  masculine 
gender ;  as  dente,  tooth  ;  valle,  valley,  &c. 

The  exceptions  are  fe,  faith ;  fonte,  fountain  ;  chave, 
key  ;  torre,  tower ;  ave,  bird  ;  carne,  flesh  or  meat ;  gentc, 
people  ;  morte,  death  ;  neve,  snow  ;  noite,  night ;  pontet 
bridge;  peste,  plague;  parte,  part;  serpente,  serpent; 
lebre,  hare. 

Except  also  all  names  of  virtues,  vices,  faculties,  and 
those  expressive  of  the  passions  of  the  mind  ;  as  virtude, 
virtue  ;  santidade,  holiness  ;  bondade,  goodness ;  vaidade, 
vanity ;  ociosidade,  idleness,  <fec. 

Thirdly,  idade,  age ;  velhice,  old  age  ;  rusticidade,  rus- 
ticity ;  capacidade,  capacity ;  felicidade,  happiness ;  sorte, 
lot ;  arte,  art ;  arvore,  tree  ;  fertilidade,*  fertility ;  sede, 
thirst ;  sele,  a  hedge  ;  couve,  cabbage ;  kerdade,  farm  ; 
chamine,  chimney ;  parede,  wall ;  saude,  health  ;  rede,  net ; 
mare,  tide ;  febre,  fever ;  gale,  galley,  &c. 

OF    THE    GENDER   OF    NOUNS    ENDING    IN    /. 

Nouns  ending  in  i  are  masculine ;  as  extasi,  a  rapture  ; 
nebri,  a  hawk,  <tc.,  and  also  those  ending  in  eit  as  rei, 
king ;  and  in  ai,  as  pai,  father ;  and  in  oi,  as  in  boi,  ox, 
tkc.  Except  lei,  law  ;  mdi,  mother,  which  are  feminine. 

OF   NOUNS   ENDING   IN    0. 

Nouns  ending  in  o  are  of  the  masculine  gender ;  as 
livro,  book  ;  fiUio,  son ;  braco,  arm ;  vestido,  garment  ; 
espelho,  looking-glass,  &c.  Except  ndo,  a  ship ;  fil/io,  a 
fritter  or  pancake  ;  eiro,  an  eel. 

*  All  words  ending  in  dade,  without  exception,  or  all  ending  in 
ade,  with  the  exceptions  of  alvaiade,  whitelead,  frade,  friar,  and 
confrade,  fellow-friar,  are  feminine  in  Portuguese. 


1 4  NOUNS. 


OF    NOUNS    ENDING    IN    U. 

All  nouns  ending  in  u  are  masculine  ;  as  peru,  a 
turkey ;  grou,  a  crane. 

OP   THE   OTHER   TERMINATIONS    OP   NOUNS,    OR    OP    THOSE 
TERMINATING   IN   CONSONANTS. 

1.  All  nouns  ending  in  al  are  masculine;  as  sinal,  a 
sign  or  token  ;  sal,  salt.     Except  cal,  lime,  which  is  femi- 
nine, and  has  no  plural. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  changing  the 
letter  /  of  the  singular  into  es;  as  sinafs  from  sinal  ; 
animaes  from  animal. 

2.  Nouns  ending  in  ar  are  of  the  masculine  gender ; 
as  ar,  air. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es  to 
the  singular ;  as  ares  from  ar. 

Some  nouns  ending  in  as  in  the  plural  are  feminine, 
and  have  no  singular ;  as  migas,  exequias,  &c. 

3.  Nouns  ending  in  az  are  of  the  masculine  gender ; 
as  rapaz,  a  boy  ;  except  paz,  peace.     The  plural  is  formed 
by  the  addition  of  es  to  the  singular. 

4.  Nouns  ending  in  el  are  masculine  ;    as   annel,  a 
ring ;  papel,  paper,  &c. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  changing  the  I 
of  the  singular  into  is  ;  anneis,  from  annel ;  papeis,  from 
papel. 

5.  Nouns  ending  in  em  are  of  the  masculine  gender; 
as  homem,   a  man ;    bem,    benefit,    &c.      Except    ordem, 
order ;    viagem,   a  voyage ;    virgem,   a   virgin,   &c.  ;    but 
selvagem,  a  savage,  is  common. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  changing  the 
m  of  the  singular  into  ns  ;  as  homens  from  homem,  &c. 

6.  Nouns  ending  in  er  are  of  the  masculine  gender ; 


NOUNS.  15 

as  poder,  power ;  prazer,  pleasure,  <fec.     Except  colher,  a 
spoon  ;  mulher,  a  woman. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es  to 
the  singular ;  as  colheres,  from  colher. 

7.  Nouns  ending  in  ez  are  of  the  masculine  gender ; 
as  freguez,  a  customer ;    mez,  month ;  arnez,  levez,  revez, 
tfcc.     Except  surdez,  deafness ;  torquez,  vez,  &c. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es  to 
the  singular,  as  freguezes,  from  freguez  ;  but  tez  has  no 
plural. 

8.  Nouns  ending  in  il  are  of  the  masculine  gender ; 
as  funil,  a  funnel  ;  barril,  a  barrel. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  changing  the 
/  of  the  singular  into  «  /  as  funis,  from  funil,  &c.  Except 
aquatil  facil,  &c.,  which  change  the  il  into  eis  in  the 
plural ;  as  faceis,  from  facil  ;  aquateis,  from  aquatil ;  and 
pensil,  which  has  its  plural  pensiles. 

9.  Nouns  ending  in  im  are  of  the  masculine  gender  ; 
as  espadim,  a  little  sword. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  changing  the 
m  of  the  singular  into  ns  ;  as  espadins,  from  espadidim. 

10.  Nouns  ending  in  ir  or  yr  are  of  the  masculine 
gender ;  but  martir  or  martyr,  a  martyr,  is  common. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es  to 
the  singular. 

11.  All   nouns   ending   in   iz  are  of  the   masculine 
gender ;  as  opprendiz,  an  apprentice  ;  nariz,  nose  ;  verniz, 
varnish ;  matiz,  a  shadowing  in  painting  ;  chafariz,  cJia- 
mariz,   &c.     Except  aboiz,  perdiz,   raiz,  codomiz,   matriz, 
<kc. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es  to 
the  singular ;  as  perdizes,  from  perdiz. 

12.  Nouns  ending  in  ol  are  of  the  masculine  gender; 
as  anzol,  a  hook  ;  sol,  the  sun,  &c. 


16  NOUNS. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  changing  the 
I  of  the  singular  into  es  ;  as  anzoes  from  anzol,  <fec. 

13.  Nouns  ending  in  om  are  of  the  masculine  gender ; 
as  som,  sound ;  dom,  gift,  &c. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  changing  the 
m  of  the  singular  into  ns  ;  as  sons  from  som,  &c. 

14.  Nouns  ending  in  or  are  of  the  masculine  gender  ; 
as  amor,  love ;  temor,  fear,  &c.     Except  dor,  pain ;  cor, 
colour,  &c. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es  to 
the  singular ;  as  amores  from  amdr. 

Nouns  ending  in  os  are  of  the  masculine  gender ;  as 
Deos,  God. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es;  as 
Deoses  from  Deos. 

15.  Nouns  ending  in  oz  are  of  the  masculine  gender  ; 
as  albernoz,  a  Moorish  coat;  arrdz,  rice  ;  algoz,  hangman, 
&c.     Except  noz,  a  walnut ;  voz,  voice ;  foz,  the  mouth  of 
a  river. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es  to 
the  singular. 

16.  Nouns  ending  in  ul  or  um  are  of  the  masculine 
gender  ;  as  sul,  the  south  ;  atum,  tunny-fish. 

The  plural  of  those  ending  in  ul,  according  to  the 
learned  Bluteau,  is  formed  by  changing  the  I  of  the  sin- 
gular into  es  ;  as  sues  for  sul ;  azues  from  azul,  blue,  &c. 
Except  consules  from  consul,  a  consul. 

The  plural  of  those  ending  in  um  is  formed  by  chang- 
ing the  m  of  the  singular  into  ns  ;  as  atuns  from  atum. 

17.  Nouns  ending  in  uz  are  of  the  masculine  gender  ; 
as  arcabuz,  an  arquebus. 

The  plural  of  these  nouns  is  formed  by  adding  es  to 
the  singular. 

18.  Nouns  ending  in  do  are  of  the  feminine  gender; 


NOUNS.  17 

as  mdo,  hand ;  composi^do,  composition ;  oraqao,  oration, 
&c.  Except  pdo,  bread  ;  ando,  dwarf ;  ou$do,  handworm  ; 
trovdo,  thunder ;  esquadrdo,  squadron ;  pido,  top  ;  borrdo, 
blot ;  papeldo,  cardboard ;  cJido,  ground  ;  quinhdo,  share.* 

There  is  no  certain  rule  for  the  formation  of  the 
plural  of  the  nouns  ending  in  do  ;  because  some  change 
the  do  of  the  singular  into  des,  as  Alemdes,  from  Alemdo, 
German  ;  capitdes,  from  capitdo,  captain ;  cdes,  from  cdoy 
dog ;  pdes,  from  pdo,  loaf,  &c.  Some  change  the  do 
of  the  singular  into  dos ;  as  cidaddos,  from  cidaddo, 
citizen ;  christdos,  from  christdo,  Christian ;  cortezaoa, 
from  cortezdo,  courtier ;  villdos,  from  villdo,  villain,  &c. 
Some  change  the  do  of  the  singular  into  oes  ;  as  esquadroes, 
from  esquadrdo,  squadron ;  trovoes,  from  trovdo,  thunder  ; 
conclusoes,  from  conclusdo,  conclusion  ;  ora^oes,  from  ora$do, 
oration  ;  and  generally  all  the  Portuguese  nouns  that  may 
be  easily  made  English  by  changing  their  termiDation  f«o 
into  the  English  termination  tion — as  dedinaqdo,  declen- 
sion or  declination  ;  considera$do,  consideration,  &c. — are 
of  the  feminine  gender. 

19.  All  nouns  signifying  a  male  must  be  of  the  mas- 
culine gender  ;  as  duque,  duke  ;  marquez,  marquis ;  conde, 
count ;  and  those  denoting  a  female  are  always  feminine. 

Two  general  rules  may   be   formed   from   what   has 

*  The  quantity  of  Portuguese  nouns  ending  in  do  being  very 
great,  and  the  exceptions  to  the  rule,  that  they  are  feminine,  num- 
bering a  good  half  of  those  that  conform  to  it,  we  will  remark  in 
regard  to  nouns  of  such  termination,  that : 

1st.  All  augmentatives  are  masculine,  without  exception. 

2nd.  Verbal  nouns  are  feminine,  excepting  the  following  (nearly 
all  of  which  are  real  augmentatives) :  apertdo,  arremetssSo,  cevdo, 
empurrdo,  empuxdo,  enchemdo,  encontrdo,  espido,  tenddo. 

3rd.  Nouns  not  verbal  are  masculine,  except  amarelliddo,  con- 
stella^do,  tscraviddo,  lunaqdo,  mdo,  mansiddo,  multiddo,  sedi<;dot 
soliddo,  tribulaqdo,  verea$do,  vtrmelhiddo. 

C 


18  NOUNS. 

been    said    concerning   the    formation   of   the  plural    of 
nouns,  viz.: 

I.  That  all  nouns  ending  in  any  of  the  vowels  have 
their  plural  formed  by  adding  the  letter  s  to  the  singular. 

II.  That  the  plural  of  nouns  ending  in  az,  ez,  iz,  oz,  uz, 
is  formed  by  adding  es  to  the  singular. 


OF   AUGMENTATIVES. 

The  Portuguese  have  their  augmentatives  formed  by 
the  increase  of  one  or  two  syllables,  which  they  add  to 
the  end  of  their  nouns,  and  which  serve  either  to  augment 
the  signification  of  nouns,  or  to  declare  a  thing  con- 
temptible :  thus,  from  homem,  a  man,  they  form  homem- 
zarrdOj  a  great  strong  man  ;  from  tolo,  a  fool,  toleirrio, 
a  great  fool,  &c.,  and  some  others  that  may  be  learned  by 
use.  They  have  also  their  augmentatives  for  the  feminine  ; 
as  mulherona,  a  great  stout  woman  ;  toleirona,  <kc.* 

There  are  a  great  many  nouns  that  appear,  by  their 
termination,  to  be  augmentatives,  though  they  are  not  ; 
as,  forcio,  a  ferret ;  atafona,  an  ass  or  a  horse-mill,  &c. 

OF    DIMINUTIVES. 

The  diminutives  lessen  the  signification  of  their 
primitives. 

The  diminutives  in  the  Portuguese  language  are  always 
formed  by  changing  the  last  vowel  of  the  primitives  into 
inho  ;  but  they  denote  either  smallness  of  things,  or  kind- 
ness and  flattery  :  as  bickinko,  a  little  worm,  from  bicho,  a 
worm ;  coitadinho,  from  coitado,  a  poor  little  man ;  loni- 
tinho,  a  little  pretty  person  or  thing,  from  lonito,  pretty. 

*  It  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  Portuguese  language  that  aug- 
mentatives in  do  are  also  formed  in  it  sometimes,  as  well  as  in 
ona,  from  feminine  primitives,  and  that  the  first  then  assume  the 
masculine  gender ;  so  from  espada,  a  sword,  is  made  espaddo,  a 
great  sword ;  from  mulher,  mulherdo;  from  canastra,  canastrfio,  &c. 


ADJECTIVES.  1 9 

Sometimes  they  are  formed  by  adding  zinho  to  the 
primitives ;  as  cdozinho,  a  little  dog,  from  caoy  a  dog ; 
irmaozinho,  dear  little  brother,  from  irmdo,  &c.* 

The  diminutives  that  serve  for  the  feminine  have  their 
termination  in  inha,  or  zinJia  ;  as  mdozinha,  a  little  hand, 
from  mdo,  a  hand  ;  cabecinha,  a  little  head,  from  cabe$a,  a 
head.  It  may  be  seen,  from  the  last  example,  that  the 
diminutives  serving  for  the  feminine  and  ending  in  inha, 
are  formed  by  changing  the  last  syllable  a  of  the  primi- 
tive into  inha. 

Observe  that  many  nouns  appear  to  be  diminutives 
without  being  so ;  as  moinho,  a  mill ;  espinha,  a  fish-bone. 

Note  :  the  diminutives  in  Portuguese  convey  some- 
times a  bad  meaning,  and  denote  contempt. 


OF  ADJECTIVES. 

All  adjectives  ending  in  o  make  their  feminine  by 
changing  the  o  into  a  ;  as  douta,  from  douto,  learned ;  but 
mao,  bad,  make  mti  in  the  feminine. 

Those  which  end  in  do  have  their  feminine  in  a;  as, 
sa,  from  sdo,  healthy ;  lou$a,  from  lou$ao,  brisk,  gay, 
beautiful ;  med,  from  medo,  middling,  ordinary. 

Those  ending  in  e  are  common  to  both  genders;  as 
forte,  strong,  &c. 

*  No  language  has  so  many  diminutives  of  different  degrees, 
especially  in  its  familiar  style,  as  the  Portuguese  :  thus,  for  in- 
stance, the  adjective  pequeno,  small,  is  gradually  diminished  by 
being  turned  into  pequenote,  pequenete,  pequenito,  pequenino, 
pequenicho,  &c.,  and  cordeiro,  a  lamb,  into  cordeirote,  cordeirete, 
cordeirito,  cordeirinho  ;the  same  is  done  with  other  substantives 
and  adjectives :  this  for  the  masculine.  For  the  feminine  the 
nal  o  is  changed  into  a. 


20  ADJECTIVES. 

Those  which  end  in  m  make  their  feminine  by  adding 
an  a  to  the  masculine  ;  as  uma,  from  um,  one  ;  alyuma, 
from  algum,  some,  &c. :  and  sometimes  by  changing  the 
m  into  a  ;  as  boa  from  bom,  good. 

Those  ending  in  u  make  their  feminine  by  adding  an 
a  to  the  masculine ;  as  nua,  from  nu,  naked ;  crua,  from 
cru,  raw. 

Those  ending  in  ez  are  common  to  both  genders ;  as 
cortez,  civil,  kind ;  capaz,  capable,  &c.  :  except  some 
which  make  the  feminine  by  adding  a  to  the  mascu- 
line ;  as  Franceza,  from  Francez,  French ;  Portugueza, 
from  Portuguez,  Portuguese. 

Espanhol,  Spanish,  makes  Espanhola  in  the  feminine ; 
but  generally  those  which  end  in  I  are  common  to  both 
genders  ;  as  a/avel,  affable ;  cruel,  cruel,  &c. 

OF    THE    COMPARISON    OF    ADJECTIVES. 

The  comparison  of  adjectives  is  the  way  of  increasing 
their  signification  by  certain  degrees,  which  are  three, 
viz.,  the  positive,  comparative,  and  superlative. 

The  positive  lays  down  the  natural  signification  of  the 
adjective  ;  as  nobre,  noble ;  yr ancle,  great. 

The  comparative  raises  it  to  a  higher  degree,  by  com- 
paring it  with  the  positive,  which  in  Portuguese  is  per- 
formed by  the  adverbs  mais,  more  ;  menos,  less  :  as,  mais 
nobre,  more  noble ;  menos  bella,  less  handsome. 

The  following  four  comparatives  constitute  excep- 
tions : — 

Maior,  greater. 
Menor,  less. 
Peior,  wrorse. 
Mel/ior,  better. 
Observe,  that  there  can  be  no  comparison  made  with- 


ADJECTIVES.  21 

out  the  word  than;  and  that  this  word  is  expressed  in 
Portuguese  by  que,  or  do  que.  Ex.  Mais  claro  que  o  sol, 
clearer  than  the  sun  ;  mais  branco  que  a  neve,  more  white 
than  the  snow.  The  particle  que  is  sometimes  preceded 
by  the  word  do.  Ex.  Isto  e  mais  do  que  eu  Ihe  disse,  this 
is  more  than  I  told  him ;  e  mais  prudente  do  que  parece, 
he  is  more  wise  than  it  appears. 

N.B.  The  comparatives  superior,  inferior,  and  some 
others,  do  not  require  que  before  the  second  term,  but  the 
dative  of  the  articles,*  viz.,  a,  d,  ds,  ao,  aos.  Ex.  0 
outro  e  superior  a  este,  the  other  is  superior  to  this. 

When  the  Portuguese  have  a  mind  to  heighten  their 
comparisons  they  make  use  of  muito  mais,  or  muito  menos, 
a  great  deal  or  much  less.  Ex.  Caesar  e  muito  mais 
estimado  que  Pompeio,  Csesar  is  much  more  esteemed  than 
Pompey ;  Pompeio  foi  muito  menos  feliz  que  Ccesary 
Pompey  was  much  less  happy  than  Caesar. 

OF  THE  SUPERLATIVE  ABLOLUTE. 

The  Portuguese  superlative  absolute  is  formed  from 
the  positive  by  changing  the  last  letter  into  issimo  for 
the  masculine,  and  into  issima,  for  the  feminine  ;  thus, 
from  bello  is  formed  bellissimo  and  bellissima,  most  hand- 
some. 

Observe  that  some  superlatives  absolute  are  differently 
formed  :  as,  frigidissimo,  from  frio,  cold  ;  amidssimo,  from 
amigo,  friend ;  antiquissimo,  from  antigo,  ancient ;  capa- 
cissimo,  from  capaz^,  capable ;  nobilissimo,  from  nobre, 
noble ;  acerbissimo,  from  acerbo,  sharp,  or  acerb ;  riquis- 
ximo,  from  rico,  rich ;  fertilissimo,  from  fertil,  fertile ; 

*  It  would  be  more  intelligible  to  say,  that  these  require  a 
dative  with  its  preposition  a. 

t  Adjectives  in  az  generally  change  the  z  into  cissimo  in  their 
superlative. 


22 


bonissimo,  from  bom,  good  ;  fidelissimo,  from  fiel,  faithful ; 
sacratissimo,  from  sagrado,  sacred,  &c. 

The  most  is  expressed  also  in  Portuguese  by  o  metis 
and  a  mais  ;  as,  the  most  fair,  or  fairest,  o  mais  bello,  a 
mais  bella.  But  there  are  some  adjectives  which  do  not 
admit  of  muito,  very,  o  mais,  or  a  mais  ;  as  morto,  dester- 
rado,  &c. 

Observe,  that  by  changing  the  last  letter  of  the  super- 
latives into  amente,  superlative  adverbs  are  composed  ;  as 
from  doutissimo,  learned  ;  doutissimamente,  most  learnedly, 
&c.  But  the  positive  adverbs  are  formed  by  adding 
mente  to  the  feminine  of  the  positive ;  as  doutamente, 
learnedly,  from  douta,  the  feminine  of  douto ;  prudente- 
mente,  prudently,  from  prudente,  prudent. 


OF    NUMERAL    NOUNS. 
AND    FIRST    OF    CARDINAL. 

The  cardinal  nouns  are  such  as  express  the  number  of 

things  ;  as,  TT      TT 

Um,  uma,  one. 

DouSj  DuaSj  two. 
Tres,  three. 
Quatro,  four. 
Cinco,  five. 
SeiSj  six. 
Sete,  seven. 
Oito,  eight. 
Nove,  nine. 
Dez,  ten. 
Onze,  eleven. 
Doze,  twelve. 
Treze,  thirteen. 
Quatorze,  fourteen. 
Quinze,  fifteen. 


NOUNS.  23- 

Dezaseiz,  sixteen. 
Dezasete,  seventeen. 
Dezoito,  eighteen. 
Dezanove,  nineteen. 
Vinte,  twenty. 
Vinte  e  urn,  twenty-one. 
Vinte  e  dois,  twenty-two. 
Vinte  e  tres,  &c.,  twenty-three,  &c. 
Trinta,  thirty. 
Quarenta,  forty. 
Cincoenta,  fifty, 
Sessenta,  sixty. 
Setenta,  seventy. 
Oitenta,  eighty. 
Noventa,  ninety. 
Cento,  Cem,  a  hundred. 
Duzentos,  duzentas,  two  hundred. 
Trezentos,  trezentas,  three  hundred, 
Quatrocentos,  four  hundred. 
Quinhentos  five  hundred. 
Seiscentos,  six  hundred. 
Mil,  a  thousand. 
Dous  mil,  two  thousand. 
Milhdo,  or  conto,  a  million. 
Uma  dezena,  half  a  score. 
Uma  duzia,  a  dozen. 
Uma  vintena,  a  score. 
Duas  vintenas,  two  score. 
Tres  vintenas,  three  score. 

Observe,  that  all  the  cardinals  that  are  adjective 
nouns  are  not  declined,  being  of  the  common  gender, 
except  um,  uma,  one  ;  dois,  duas,  two ;  and  those  composed 
of  cento,  a  hundred  ;  as  duzentos,  two  hundred  ;  quatro 


-24  NOUNS. 

\ 

centos,   quatro  centas,   four  hundred,  &c. ;  and  when  t 
feminine  uma  is  preceded  by  a,  and  followed  by  a  outra, 
then  a  iima  signifies  first,  and  a  outra,  secondly. 

The  plural  uns,  umas,  is  taken  sometimes  instead  of 
•aJf/uns,  algumas,  signifying  some ;  as,  uns  reis*  some 
reis ;  umas  ma$as,  some  apples. 

N.B.  Cento  loses  to  before  a  noun,  either  masculine  or 
feminine,  and  the  n  is  changed  into  m ;  therefore  you 
must  say,  cem  soldados,  not  cento  soldados.  It  only  retains 
to  and  n  when  it  is  followed  by  another  number,  as 
cento  e  um,  &c.,  a  hundred  and  one,  &c.,  and  when  it  is  a 
substantive. 

N.B.  Sometimes  cento  is  made  a  substantive  ;  as  um 
cento  de  castanhas,  one  hundred  of  chestnuts  :  likewise 
all  the  cardinal  numbers,  when  preceded  by  an  article, 
or  by  another  noun  of  number,  as  o  cinco  de  pdos,  the 
five  of  clubs ;  um  sete,  a  seven. 

The  cardinal  number  is  used  in  Portuguese  instead 
of  the  ordinal  when  it  expresses  the  day  of  the  month,  or 
the  date  of  any  act ;  as,  die  chegou  a  quatro  de  Maio,  he 
arrived  the  fourth  day  of  May.  The  first  clay  of  the 
month  is,  however,  an  exception  to  this  rule  ;  as,  o  primeiro 
•de  Maio,  the  first  of  May. 

OF    ORDINAL    NOUNS. 

Ordinal   nouns    are    such    as    express    the    order    of 

things ;   as, 

Primeiro,  primeira,  first. 

Segundo,  seaunda,  second. 
Terceiro,  terceira,  third. 
Quarto,  fourth. 
Quinto,  fifth. 
/Sexto,  sixth. 
*  Derived  from  real,  a  Portuguese  coin. 


NOUNS.  25 

,  seventh. 
Oitavo,  eighth. 
Nona,  ninth. 
Decimo,  tenth. 
Undecimo,  eleventh. 
Duodecimo,  twelfth. 
Decimo-tercio,  thirteenth. 
Decimo  quarto,  fourteenth. 
Decimo-quinto,  fifteenth. 
Decimo-sexto,  sixteenth. 
Decimo-setimo,  seventeenth. 
Decimo-oitavo,  eighteenth. 
Decimo-nono,  nineteenth. 
Vigesimo,  twentieth. 
Vigesimo-primeiro,  one-and-twentieth. 
Trigesimo,  thirtieth. 
Quadragesimo,  fortieth. 
Quinquagesimo,  fiftieth. 
Sexagesimo,  sixtieth. 
Septuagesimo,  seventieth. 
Octagesimo,  eightieth. 
Nonagesimo,  ninetieth. 
Centesimo,  the  hundredth. 
Millesimo,  the  thousandth. 
Ultimo,  the  last. 

The  proportionable  numbers  are,  simples,  duplo  or 
dnplicado,  tmplo  or  triplicado,  quadruplo,  quintuplo,  cen- 
tuplo;  a  single,  double,  threefold,  fourfold,  fivefold,  a 
hundredfold. 

The  distributive  nouns  are  um  a  um,  one  by  one ;  dots 
a  dot's,  two  by  two. 

In  English  all  ordinal  numbers  may  be  formed  into 
adverbs  ;  but  in  Portuguese  they  have  only primeiramentet 


26  NOUNS. 

jind    secundariamente,     first,    secondly ;     and    to    expm 
thirdly,  fourthly,   &c.,   they  say,   em    terceiro  lugar, 
quarto  lugar,  in  the  third  place,  in  the  fourth  place. 

A  METHOD  (FOR  THOSE  WHO  UNDERSTAND  FRENCH)  TO 
LEARN  A  GREAT  MANY  PORTUGUESE  WORDS  IN  A 
SHORT  TIME. 

We  must  observe,  that  the  French  syllable  cha  is 
generally  expressed  in  Portuguese  by  ca,  rejecting  the  h. 
Ex.  Charbon,  charite,  chastete',  chapelle,  chapitre,  &c.,  the 
Portuguese  say,  carvdo,  caridade,  castidade,  capella,  capi- 
tulo,  &c.  Observe  also  the  following  rules  :— 

French  words  ending  in  ance,  or  ence,  as  Constance, 
vigilance,  clemence,  prudence,  &c.,  in  Portuguese  end  in 
ancia,  or  encia ;  as  constancia,  vigilancia,  clemencia,  pru- 
dencia,  &c. 

Ague  makes  anha ;  montagne,  montanha ;  campagne, 
campanha. 

le  makes  ia ;  comedie,  comedia.  Here  the  accent  is 
upon  the  e,  and  not  upon  the  i,  as  in  French ;  poesie, 
poesia. 

Oire  makes  oria  ;  gloire,  gloria  ;  victoire,  victoria. 

Ure  makes  ura  ;  imposture,  impostura  ;  figure,  figura. 

Ison  makes  sdo  ;  prison,  prisdo  ;  raison,  racdo. 

On  makes  do  ;  charbon,  carvdo  ;  baron,  bardo. 

Ulier  makes  ular  ;  regulier,  regular  ;  particulier,  par- 
ticular. 

FRENCH    TERMINATIONS    ENDING    IN    PORTUGUESE    IN    E. 

Ant,  ante;  vigilant,  vigilante;  amant,  amante. 
Ent,    adjective,    ente ;    prudent,  prudente ;    diligent, 
diligente. 

Te  makes  dade  ;  liberalite,  liberalidade. 


NOUNS.  27 

FRENCH    TERMINATIONS   ENDING   IN    PORTUGUESE    IN    VEL. 

Able,  vel ;  louable,  louvavel  ;  aimable,  amavel. 

FRENCH   TERMINATIONS  ENDING  IN  PORTUGUESE  IN  EZ. 

Ais,  names  of  nations,  ez ;  Fra^ais,  Frances  ;  Anglais, 
Inglez. 

FRENCH    TERMINATIONS    ENDING    IN    PORTUGUESE    IN    0. 

Ain  and  ien,  names  of  nations,  ano  ;  Romain,  Romano  ; 
Italien,  Italiano ;  Napolitain,  Napolitano. 

Aire,  ario ;  salaire,  salario  ;  temeraire,  temerario. 

Eau,  eo ;  chapeau,  chapeo. 

Ent,  substantive,  ento ;  sacrement,  sacramento. 

Eux,  oso  ;  g£nereux,  generoso  ;  gracieux,  gracioso. 

If,  ivo  ;  actif,  activo  ;  passif,  passivo. 

C,  co ;  Turc,  Turco. 

FRENCH    TERMINATIONS    ENDING    IN    PORTUGUESE    IN    OR. 

Eur,  or ;  terreur,  terror ;  humenr,  humor  ;  chaleur, 
color. 

CHANGE    OF    TERMINATIONS    OF    THE    VERBS    AND 
PARTICIPLES. 

Er,  in  the  infinitive  mood  of  the  first  conjugation, 
makes  ar ;  aimer,  amar  ;  chanter,  cantar. 

Ir  makes  ir,  in  the  infinitive  mood  ;  as,  partir,  partir  ; 
sentir,  sentir. 

Oir  makes  er,  in  the  infinitive  mood;  as  concevoir, 
conceber. 

The  participles  in  </  make  ado  ;  aime,  amado  ;  parle, 
fallado. 

The  participles  in  i  make  ido  ;  dormi,  dormido ;  menti, 
mentido. 


28  PRONOUNS. 

The  participles'  in  u  make  do ;  as,  conc_u,  concebido ; 
entendu,  entendido. 

There  are  a  great  many  Portuguese  words  that  have 
no  manner  of  analogy  with  the  French,  which  prevent 
these  rules  from  being  general. 


CHAPTER     IV. 
OF  PRONOUNS. 

THE  pronouns  are  personal,  conjunctive,  mixed,  posi- 
tive, demonstrative,  interrogative,  relative,  or  improper. 

OF    PERSONAL    PRONOUNS. 

The  personal  pronouns  are  eu  and  nos  for  the  first 
person  •  they  serve  for  the  masculine  and  the  feminine. 

Tu  and  vds  for  the  second ;  these  serve  also  for  the 
masculine  and  feminine. 

Elle  for  the  third  person  of  the  masculine  gender,  and 
dies  in  the  plural. 

Ella  for  the  third  person  of  the  feminine  gender, 
makes  in  the  plural  ellas. 

The  pronouns  personal  are  declined  with  the  preposi- 
tions de,  a,  andjoor. 

THE    DECLENSION    OF    PERSONAL    PRONOUNS. 

First  Person. 

SINGULAB.  PLUBAL. 

Nom.  Eu,  I  N.  nds,  we 

Gen.  de  mim,  of  me  G.  de  n6s,  of  us 

Dat.  a  mim,  or  me,  to  me  D.  a  n6s,  or  n6s,  us 

Ace.  me,  me  A.  nos,  us 

Abl.  de  mim,  or  por  mim,  A.  de  nos,,  or  por  n6s,  from 
from  or  by  me.  or  by  us. 


PRONOUNS.  29 

With  me  is  rendered  by  commiyo.  and  sometimes  they 
add  the  pronoun  mesmo  to  it  :  me  is  expressed  by  me  in 
the  Portuguese  ;  as,  speak  to  me,  fallai-me  ;  tell  me, 
dizei-me  ;  send  me,  mandai-me  ;  write  to  me,  escrevei-me  ; 
he  told  me,  die  disse-me,  &c. 

With  us  is  rendered  in  Portuguese  by  comnosco. 

Us  is  rendered  by  nos.*  Example  :  tell  us,  dizei-nos  ; 
give  us,  dai-nos  ;  show  us,  mostrai-nos  ;  he  told  us,  elle 
disse-nos,  &c.  In  these  examples  us  is  not  a  personal 
pronoun,  but  conjunctive,  as  you  will  see  hereafter. 

Second  Person, 

SINGULAR.  PLURAL. 

Nom.  tii,  thou  N.  v6s,  ye  or  you 

Gen.     de  ti,  of  thee  G.   de  vds,  or  vos,  you 

Dat.     a  ti,  or  te,  to  thee     D.  a  vds,  or  vos,  to  you 
Ace.     te,  thee  A.  vos,  you 

Abl.     de  ti,  Qrporti,  from  A.   de  vos,  or  por  v6s,  from 
or  by  thee.  or  by  you. 

With  thee  is  rendered  by  comtigo  ;  and  sometimes 
they  add  to  it  the  pronoun  mesmo.  You,  or  yourself,  after 
imperatives,  is  rendered  by  vos,  and  not  vos;  as,  be 
you  contented,  contentai-vos  ;  show  yourself,  mostrai-vos  : 
hide  yourselves,  escondei-vos. 

Thee,  or  thyself,  is  expressed  after  imperatives  by  te  ; 
as,  mostra  te,  show  thyself. 

is  rendered  in  Portuguese  by  comvosco. 


*  The  pronouns  nos  and  nos  are  pronounced,  the  first  with  the 
open  6,  as  its  accent  indicates  ;  the  second  with  the  o  mute.  The 
o,  therefore,  is  mute  in  the  conjunctive  pronouns.  The  c  is  equally 
mute  in  the  same  conjunctive  pronouns  :  this  it  is  necessary  to 
remember. 


30 


PRONOUNS. 


Third  Person  (for  the  Masculine). 

PLURAL. 

N.  elles,  they 
G.  d'elles,  of  them 
D.  a  elles.  or  Ihes.  to  the 


SINGULAR. 

Nom.  elle,  he  or  it 

Gen.    d'elle,  of  him  or  of  it 

Dat.     a  elle,  or  Ihe,  to  him, 

or  to  it 
o,  him  o?'  it 

,  orporelle,  from 
or  by  him  or  it. 


Ace. 
Abl. 


A.  os,  them 

A.  d'elles,  or  por  elles,  from 
or  by  them. 

The  Portuguese  have  no  particular  pronoun,  as  the 
English  it,  for  things  that  are  inanimate. 

The  pronoun  him,  or  to  him,  when  joined  to  a  verb,  is 
always  rendered  in  Portuguese  by  I  he  ;  and  them,  or  to  them, 
by  Uies. 

With  him  is  rendered  in  Portuguese  sometimes  by  com 
elle,  and  sometimes  by  comsigo,  to  which  they  add  the 
pronoun  mesmo. 


PLURAL. 

N.  ellas,  they 

G.  tf  ellas,  of  them 

D.  a  ellas,  or  Ihes  to  them 


A.  as,  them 


Third  Person  (Feminine}. 

SINGULAR. 

Nom.  ella,  she  or  it 

Gen.     delta,  of  her  or  of  it 

Dat.     a  ella,  or  Ihe  to  her  or 

to  it 

Ace.     a,  her  or  it 
Abl.     della,  or  joor  ella,  from  A.  dellas,  or  por 

or  by  her  or  it.  or  by  them. 

The  pronoun  her,  or  to  'her,  when  joined  to  a  verb,  is 
always  rendered  in  Portuguese  by  Ihe  ;  and  tliem,  or  to 
tJiem,  by  Ihes :  as  will  be  seen  in  the  conjunctive  pro- 
nouns. 

With  her  is  rendered  in  Portuguese  by  com  ella,  or 
comsiyo. 


s,  from 


PRONOUNS.  31 

OP    THE    PRONOUN    SI,   HIMSELF    OR  ONESELF. 

There  is  another  personal  pronoun  that  serves  indif- 
ferently for  the  masculine  and  feminine  :  this  is  si,  one- 
self. It  has  no  nominative. 

Gen.  de  si,  of  oneself,  himself,  or  herself 

Dat.  a  si,  to  oneself,  &c. 

Ace.  se,  oneself,  &c. 

Abl.   de  si,  por  si,  from  or  by  oneself. 

It  is  joined  with  the  pronoun  mesmo  or  mesma  ;  as  de 
or  por  si  mesmo,  by  himself  ;  por  si  mesma,  or  de  si  mesma, 
by  herself ;  o  homem  ndo  ama  sendo  a  si  mesmo,  man  loves 
himself  only  ;  quern  ndo  e  bom  sendo  para  si,  ndo  ^  bem  que 
viva,  who  cares  for  nobody  but  himself,  does  not  deserve 
to  live  ;  o  vicio  e  abominavel  por  si  mesmo,  vice  is  in  itself 
hateful ;  a  terra  de  si,  or  de  si  mesma  e  fertil,  the  earth  is 
fruitful  in  itself. 

Observe,  that  they  join  also  the  pronoun  mesmo  to 
personal  pronouns,  as  the  French  do  with  their  pronoun 
meme,  viz.  : — 

En  mesmo,  myself  no's  mesmos,  ourselves 

Tu  mesmo,  thyself  vds  mesmos,  yourselves. 

Elle  mesmo,  himself  elles  mesmos,    )  .-,          i 

Ella  mesma,  herself  ellas  mesmas,  ) 

o  homem  mesmo,  man  a  mesma  virtude,  virtue  it- 
himself.  self. 

1st.  Observe,  that  mesmo  with  the  article  is  also  an 
adjective,  signifying  the  same  ;  thus,  o  mesmo,  a  mesma,  os 
mesmos,  as  mesmas,  the  same,  relating  to  some  nouns 
expressed  or  understood. 

2ndly.  Note,  also,  that  the  adjective  outro,  other,  is 
joined  to  the  plural  of  the  personal  pronouns,  /  and  thou  : 
thus,  no's  outros,  we  ;  vos  outros,  you. 


6%  PRONOUNS. 

3rdly.  Comsigo  may  be  rendered  in  English  (as  \v 
have  said  above)  by  with  him  and  with  her ;  and  it  may 
be  rendered  also  by  with  them  in  the  plural ;  and  some- 
times by  about  him,  about  her,  or  about  them.  Ex.  Elle  or 
ella  nunca  traz  dinheiro  comsiyo,  he  or  bhe  never  has 
money  about  him,  or  about  her. 

,  OF    CONJUNCTIVE    PRONOUNS. 

The  pronouns  conjunctive  are  so  called,  because  they 
always  come  immediately  before  or  after  the  verb  that 
governs  them. 

The  conjunctive  pronouns  bear  a  great  resemblance 
to  the  personal  pronouns.  The  personal  pronouns  are  : 

Eu,  I ;  tu,  thou  ;  elle,  he  ;  nos,  we ;  v6s,  ye ;  elles, 
they. 

There  are  seven  pronouns  conjunctive,  viz  ,  me,  to  me, 
or  me  ;  te,  to  thee,  or  thee  ;  se,  to  himself,  or  himself,  to 
herself,  or  herself ;  Ihe,  to  him,  or  him,  to  her,  or  her  ; 
nos,  to  us,  or  us ;  vos,  to  you,  or  you  ;  Ihes,  to  them,  or 
them. 

EXAMPLES. 

Isto  me  agrada,  this  pleases  me ;  e-me  necessario,  I 
want. 

Deus  te  ve,  God  sees  thee. 

Ella  se  huva,  she  praises  herself. 

Eu  Ihe  direi,  I  will  tell  him,  or  I  will  tell  her. 
Eu  Ihes  prometti,  I  promised  them :  as  well  for  the  mas- 
culine as  the  feminine. 

The  pronoun  conjunctive,  Ihe,  is  always  put  after  the 
verb,  when  it  is  in  the  imperative  mood  ;  as  dizei-lhe,  tell 
him ;  cortai-lhe  as  azas,  cut  his  wings  :  but  when  the  verb 
is  in  some  other  mood,  it  may  be  put  either  before  or 
after  it  :  as,  elle  Ihe  cortou,  or  elle  cortou-Uie  a  cabe^a,  he 


PRONOUNS.  33 

has  cut  off  his  head.  The  same  observation  applies  to 
the  other  conjunctive  pronouns. 

The  conjunctive  pronoun,  se,  is  sometimes  followed  by 
me,  Ike,  <fec.;  as  offerece-se-me,  it  is  offered  to  me;  repre- 
sentou-se-lhe,  it  was  represented  to  him,  &c. 

1st.  Note,  that  the  pronouns  conj  active  are  very  often 
joined  to  a  verb,  preceded  or  followed  by  the  verb  haver. 
Ex.  Dar-lhe-hei  tanta  pancada,  or  eu  Ihe  hei  de  dar  tanta 
pancada,  que,  &c.,  I  will  cudgel  him  so  much  that,  <fec. 

2ndly.  Lhe  is  sometimes  rendered  in  English  by  you. 
Ex.  Que  Ihe  parece  aquillo  ?  What  do  you  think  of  that  ? 
Assente  no  que  Ihe  digo,  be  persuaded,  or  believe  what  I 
tell  you. 

OF   MIXED   PRONOUNS. 

There  are  some  pronouns  in  Portuguese  which  are 
composed  of  the  pronouns  personal  and  conjunctive,  and 
which  therefore  are  called  mixed. 

These  pronouns  are  formed  by  changing  the  letter  e 
of  the  pronoun  conjunctive  into  o  for  the  masculine,  and 
a  for  the  feminine ;  thus,  it  to  me,  instead  of  me  o,  or  me 
a,  you  must  say,  m'o  or  m'a.  In  like  manner,  instead  of 
Ihe  o,  or  Ihe  a,  you  must  say,  Ih'o  or  IK  a,  &c.,  as  you 
may  observe  in  the  following  pronouns  mixed,  or  rather 
contracted. 

m'o,  m.,  it  or  him  to  me      t'o,  it  or  him  to  thee 
m'a,  f.,  it  or  her  to  me         t'a  it  or  her  to  thee 

m'os,  m.  )  ,,  (  t'os.  m.  )  ,,  ,, 

V  them  to  me  >  them  to  thee 

mas,  i.    J  I  tas,  f.    J 

Ih'o,  m.,  it  to  him.  or  to  her 

Ih'a,  f.,  it  to  him,  or  to  her 
Ih'cs,  m.,  them  to  him  or  to  them 
Mi  as,  f.,  them  to  her  or  to  them 


34  PRONOUNS. 


nol-o,  m. 
nol-a,  f. 

nol-os,  m.  pi.    )  ,  , 

V  them  to  us 

nol-as,  f.  pi.      J 


>  it  to  us 


vol-Oj  m.          )  . 

,      f  >  it  to  you 

vol-a,  i.  J 

vol-os.  m.  pi.    |  ,  i 

>  them  to  you 

vol-as,  i.  pi.     J 

EXAMPLES. 

dar-lh'o,  to  give  it  to  him,  or  to  her. 
Dai-m'o,  give  it  to  me. 
jBw  £'o  darei,  I  will  give  it  you. 
Entrego-t'o,  I  deliver  it  to  you. 
Dize-lh'o,  you  tell  it  him,  or  her. 
Entrega-ltios,  deliver  them  to  him,  or  to  her. 
Elle  nol-o  disse,  he  told  us  of  it. 
Eu  vol-os  mandarei,  I  will  send  them  to  you. 

If  the  verbs  are  in  the  infinitive,  the  pronouns  mixed 
may  be  put  either  before  or  after  the  verbs  ;  as,  para 
dtzerm'o,  or  para  ra'o  dizer,  to  tell  me  it  :  but  if  the  verbs 
are  in  the  gerund,  the  pronouns  mixed  must  be  trans- 
posed ;  as,  dizendom'o,  and  not  m'o  dizendo,  in  telling  me  it. 

You  must  make  use  of  these  pronouns,  both  masculine 
and  feminine,  according  to  the  gender  of  the  thing  named, 
sent  or  delivered,  and  not  of  the  person  to  whom  the 
thing  is  said,  sent,  given,  &c. 

OF   POSSESSIVE   PRONOUNS. 

Pronouns  possessive,  so  called  because  they  denote 
Jiat  the  thing  spoken  of  belongs  to  the  person  or  thing 
they  are  connected  with,  are  of  two  sorts,  absolute  and 
relative.  See  the  remarks  hereafter. 

The  English  have  no  article  in  the  nominative  before 


f      ) 

>  his,  her,  or  its 
s,  f.    J 


PRONOUNS.  35 

the  pronouns  possessive  ;  but  the  Portuguese  have  :  as,  myy 
o  meu,  masc.,  a  minha,  fern.  Plural,  os  meus,  masc.  ;  as 
minhas,  fern. 

The  pronouns   possessive  in  Portuguese  are  the  fol- 
lowing : — 

Sing,  men,  m.;  minka,  f.      ) 

Plur.  meus,  m.;  minhas,  f .  / 

Sing,  ten,  m.;  tua,  f.       )  ,, 

Plur.  teus,  m.;  tuas,  f .  / 

Sing.  sen.  m.     )  ,.     ,  ., 

>  his,  her,  or  its 
rlur.  sens,  m.  J 

Sing,  sua 
Plur.  suas 

Sing,  nosso.  m.:  nossa,  f.      ) 

,     Vour 
rlur.  nossas,  m.;  nossas,  f.    J 

Sing.  i>osso,  m .:  vossa,  f.       ) 

„     >  your 
rlur.  vossos,  m.;  vossas,  f.    J 

The  pronouns    possessive  are    declined  with  the  de- 
finite article  o  for  the  masculine,  and  a  for  the  feminine. 


EXAMPLE. 

SINGULAR. 

Nom.  o  men  livro,  my  book 

Gen.  do  men  livro,  of  my  book 

Dat.  ao  men  livro,  to  my  book 

Ace.  o  men  livro,  my  book 

Abl.  do  or  pelo  men  livro,  from  or  by  my  book 

PLURAL. 

Nom.  os  meus  livros,  my  books 

Gen.    dos  meus  livros,  of  my  books 

Dat.    aos  meus  livros,  to  my  books 

Abl.    dos  or  pelos  meus  livros,  from  or  by  my  books 


36  PRONOUNS. 

Decline  all  the  other  masculines  after  the  same 
manner,  and  their  feminines  by  the  article  a ;  as,  my 
house,  a  minha  casa  ;  of  my  house,  da  minha  casa,  &c. 

Note,  you  must  not  use  the  definite  article  when  the 
pronouns  possessive  precede  nouns  of  quality,  as  well  as 
those  of  kindred,  but  the  indefinite  article,  de,  a,  &c. 

EXAMPLES. 

Fossa  magestade,  your  majesty. 

De  vossa  magestade,  of  your  majesty,  &c. 

Men  pai,  my  father. 

De  men  pai,  of  my  father,  &c. 

From  the  above  examples  it  appears  that  nouns 
declined  with  the  definite  article  have  no  article  in  the 
nominative,  in  the  singular  number. 

Sen  is  sometimes  used  instead  of  vosso  and  -yossa,  in 
the  polite  way  of  speaking :  thus,  tenho  o  sen  livro,  I  have 
your  book ;  fallei  ao  sen  criado,  I  spoke  to  your  servant ; 
os  sens  olhos  saoformosos,  your  eyes  are  handsome. 

REMARKS    UPON    THE    POSSESSIVE. 

The  pronouns  possessive  absolute  always  come  before 
the  noun  they  belong  to.  We  have  expressed  them 
above. 

To  express  in  Portuguese  it  is  mine,  it  is  thine,  &c.,  we 
must  say  e  meu,  e  ten,  &c. 

The  pronouns  possessive  absolute  do  not  agree  in 
gender  with  the  noun  of  the  possessor,  as  in  English, 
but  with  that  of  the  thing  possessed  :  as,  a  mdi  ama  a 
seufilho,  the  mother  loves  her  son  ;  o  pai  ama  asuafilha, 
the  father  loves  his  daughter.  Thus  the  pronoun  mas- 
culine sen,  in  Portugue  e,  is  in  this  case  rendered  by  her 
in  English,  and  the  feminine  sua  by  his. 


PRONOUNS.  37 

The  same  observation  is  to  be  made  upon  the  posses- 
sives  relative,  according  to  the  gender  of  the  noun  that 
is  understood  :  we  say  of  a  hat  (for  instance)  belonging 
to  a  lady,  e  o  seu,  it  is  hers  ;  because  the  noun  under- 
stood, viz.,  chapfo,  hat  is  of  the  masculine  gender. 

We  have  already  said  that  seu  and  sua  are  sometimes 
rendered  into  English  by  your  when  they  are  absolute  : 
they  are  also  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  yours, 
when  they  are  pronouns  relative,  speaking  politely  of 
anything  belonging  to  a  gentleman  or  lady,  e  o  seu,  QIC  6  a 
ma,  it  is  yours ;  but  if  the  gentleman  or  lady  is  not  pre- 
sent, or  if  they  are  not  directly  spoken  to,  though  present, 
then  the  pronouns,  seu  and  sua  must  be  rendered  into 
English  by  his  or  hers. 

Note,  that  the  pronouns  possessive  absolute,  in  Portu- 
guese, agree  also  in  number  with  the  noun  of  the  thing 
possessed;  hence  we  say,  a  sua  historia,  its  history, 
speaking  of  a  kingdom,  province,  &c. ;  or,  his  history, 
speaking  of  any  history  composed  by  a  man ;  or,  her 
history,  speaking  of  that  written  by  a  woman ;  or,  their 
history,  speaking  of  that  written  by  several  hands  or  by 
several  people.  From  this  example,  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  Portuguese  have  no  particular  pronoun  possessive  for 
things  that  are  inanimate,  corresponding  with  the  English 
pronoun  its.  Hence,  finally,  it  follows  that,  when  the 
Portuguese  possessives  seu  and  sua  are  relative,  they  are 
rendered  into  English  by  his  or  hers,  or  theirs,  according 
to  the  gender  and  number  of  the  noun  of  the  possessor 
that  is  understood. 

The  possessives  absolute  are  left  out  when  they  are 
preceded  by  a  verb,  or  by  a  pronoun  conjunctive,  which 
sufficiently  denote  whose  thing  it  is  they  speak  of;  the 
article  alone  being  sufficient ;  as,  devo-lhe  a  vida,  I  owe 
my  life  to  him,  or  to  her,  or  to  it. 


38  PRONOUNS. 

When  the  pronouns  possessive  absolute  are  before 
nouns  of  different  genders  in  the  same  sentence,  and  with 
which  they  are  grammatically  construed,  they  ought  to  be 
repeated,  as,  sen  pai  e  sua  mdi,  his  father  and  mother ; 
not  sen  pai  e  mdi. 

The  pronoun  possessive  absolute  is  also  used  as  in  the 
following  case,  when  we  use  the  possessive  relative ;  a 
friend  of  mine,  um  dos  meus  amigos. 

The  possessives  minha,  tua,  sua,  nossa,  vossa,  may  be 
also  relative,  but  with  a  different  meaning.  Examples  : 
Levarei  a  minha  avante,  I  will  insist  upon  it,  I  will  obtain 
it ;  elle  levard  a  sua  avante,  he  will  insist  upon  it,  he  will 
do  it ;  levai  a  vossa  avante,  go  on  with  your  resolution  ; 
fazer  das  suas  to  play  tricks,  to  dodge. 

Os  meus,  os  sens,  &c.,  signifying  my  relations  or  my 
friends,  thy  relations,  or  thy  friends  :  as,  os  seus  ndo  o 
querem,  his  parents  or  relations  do  not  like  him ;  deixa-o 
ir  com  os  seus,  let  him  go  with  his  people,  his  country- 
men, &c. 

When  the  pronoun  possessive  is  accompanied  by  a 
pronoun  demonstrative,  we  do  not  put  the  article  in  the 
nominative  ;  we  do  not  say,  o  este  men  livro,  but  este 
men  livro,  this  book  of  mine.  But  in  all  other  cases 
the  indefinite  article  is  used ;  as,  d'este,  or  d'este  vosso 
livro,  &c. 

OF  THE  PRONOUNS  DEMONSTRATIVE. 

They  are  called  pronouns  demonstrative,  because  they 
serve  to  point  out  or  demonstrate  any  thing  or  person ; 
as,  this  book,  este  livro  ;  that  man,  aquelle  homem. 

There  are  three  principal  demonstratives,  viz.,  este, 
this  ;  esse,  that ;  aquelle,  that  :  este  shows  the  thing  or 
person  that  is  just  near  or  by  us ;  esse  shows  the  thing 


PRONOUNS. 


39 


that  is  a  little  further,  or  near  the  person  ;  and  aquelle 
shows  what  is  very  distant  from  the  person  who  speaks, 
or  is  spoken  of,  and  is  expressed  in  English  by  that 
there  or  yonder.  JZsse,  essa,  are  used  in  writing  to  any 
person  to  express  the  place  or  town  wherein  he  dwells  ; 
as,  tenho  fallado  n'essa  cidade  com  muitos  amigos,  I  have 
spoken  in  your  city  with  many  friends. 
These  pronouns  are  declined  thus  :— 


Sing. 


Plur. 


Nom. 

Gen. 

Dat. 

Ace. 

Abl. 

Nom. 

Gen. 

Dat. 

Ace. 

Abl. 


MASC. 

este 

d'este 

a  este 

este 

d'este 

estes 

d'estes 

a  estes 

estes 

d'estes 


FEM. 


NEUT. 


d'estas 


isto 

this 

d'isto 

of  this 

a  isto 

to  this 

isto 

this 

d'isto 

from  this 

these 

Q 

"3 
fi 

O 

to 

of  these 
to  these 
these 
from  these 

Sins 


Plur. 


MA8C. 

Nom.  esse 
Gen.    d'esse 
Dat.     a  esse 
Ace.     esse 
Abl.     d'esse 
Nom.  esses 
Gen.     d'esses 
Dat.     a  esses 
Ace.     esses 
Abl.     d'esses 


FEM. 

essa 

d'essa 

a  essa 

essa 

d'essa 

essay 

d'essas 

a  essas 

essas 

d'essas 


NEUT. 

isso 
d'isso 
a  isso 
isso 
d'isso 

o 
o> 


that  or  it 
of  that,  &c. 
to  that 
that 

from  that 
those 
of  those 
to  those 
those 
from  those 


40 


r  Nom. 
I   Gen. 


MASC. 


PRONOUNS. 


FEM. 


NEUT. 


Sing. 


aquillo      that 
d  'aquillo  of  that 
d  quillo     to  that 
aquillo      that 
d'aquillo  from  that 
£          those 

of  those 

to  those 

those 

from  those 


O) 


aquelle      aquella 
(Vaquelle  d'aquella 
-^   Dat.     d  quelle     d  quella 
I  Ace.     aquelle      aquella 
L  Abl.     d'  aquelle   d}  aquella, 
r  Nom.  aquelles     aquellas 

Gen.     d'aquelles  d'aquellas 

Plur.  ^   Dat.     a  quelles    d  quellas 

Ace.     aquelles      aquellas 

L  Abl.     d'aquelles  d'aquellas 

There  is  an  elision  of  the  vowel  of  the  preposition  de 

in  the  genitive  and  ablative  of  the  pronouns  este  and  esse, 

both  in  the  singular  and   plural;  as  d'este,  d'estas,  &c., 

instead  of  de  este,  de  estas  ;  so  also  in  the  neuter,  as  d'isso, 

d'isto,  instead  of  de  isso,  de  isto.     The  same  observation 

applies  to  the    pronoun    aquelle,  wherein   you  will    see 

another  elision  besides  in  the  dative  case. 

Both  Portuguese  and  Spaniards  have  demonstratives 
of  the  neuter  gender,  though  they  do  not  agree  with  the 
substantives,  as  in  Latin  ;  they  do  not  say  isto  homem,  but 
este  homem,  this  man.  But  the  word  cousa,  or  coisa, 
thing,  is  always  understood,  though  the  neuter  demon- 
strative does  not  agree  with  it  ;  so  that  it  is  indifferently 
said,  isto  or  esta  coisa,  this  thing  ;  isso  or  essa  coisa,  that 
thing,  &c.  Examples  :  isso  6  or  essa  e  a  coisa  de  que  nos 
estamos  fallando,  that  is  the  thing  we  are  speaking  of  ; 
aquillo  e  or  aquella  4  a  coisa  que  vos  deveis  fazer,  that  is 
the  thing  you  must  do,  &c. 

When  the  preposition  em,  in,  comes  before  the  pro- 
nouns demonstrative,  the  vowel  is  cut  oft',  and  the  con- 
sonant m  is  changed  into  n  ;  thus,  instead  of  em  este,  em 
esta,  em  isto,  em  isso,  em  aquillo,  they  write  and  pronounce, 
n'este,  n'esta,  n'isto,  n'isso,  &c.,  in  this,  in  that,  &c. 


PRONOUNS.  41 

The  words  outro,  outra,  are  often  joined  to  the  pro- 
nouns demonstrative,  cutting  off  the  final  e  ;  as  est'outro, 
ess'outro,  aquell'outro.  Examples :  est'outro  homem,  this 
other  man  ;  est'outra  mother,  this  other  woman  /  ess'outro 
homem,  that  other  man. 

The  pronoun  mesmo,  the  same,  is  also  frequently 
joined  to  the  demonstrative ;  as,  este  mesmo  homem,  this 
very  same  man ;  aquillo  mesmo,  that  very  same  thing. 
Aqui,  ali,  and  Id  are  sometimes  added  to  the  demonstra- 
tive, or  to  the  noun  that  comes  after  it,  in  order  to  specify 
and  particularise  it  still  more ;  as,  este  homem  aqui,  this 
inun  here ;  aquella  mulher  Id,  that  woman  there ;  aqui, 
denoting  a  near  or  present  object ;  and  Id,  a  distant  and 
absent  one. 

The  pronouns  aquelle,  aquella,  aquelles,  aquellas,  when 
they  relate  to  persons,  and  are  followed  by  the  relative 
que,  are  rendered  into  English  by  he  who  or  he  that,  site 
who  or  that,  they  who  or  that :  as,  aquelle  que  ama  a  virtude 
efeliz,  he  who  loves  virtue  is  happy  ;  aquelles  que  desprezdo 
a  sciencia  nao  conhecem  o  valor  d'ella,  they  who  despise 
learning  know  not  the  value  of  it.  Observe,  that  when 
aquelle,  aquella,  &c.,  are  preceded  by  este,  esta,  &c.,  then 
este  signifies  the  last  thing  or  person  spoken  of,  and  aquelle, 
&c.,  the  first ;  as,  Carlos  foi  grande,  Frederico  ambicioso, 
este  valente,  aquelle  poderoso  :  Charles  was  great,  Frederic 
ambitious,  the  first  powerful,  the  last  courageous. 

The  pronoun  possessive  absolute  his,  her,  their,  con- 
strued in  English  with  a  noun  followed  by  the  pronoun 
relative  ivho  or  that  before  a  verb,  is  rendered  in  Portu- 
guese by  the  genitive  of  the  pronouns  aquelle,  aquella, 
aquelles,  followed  by  que,  and  the  possessive  is  left  out ; 
as,  all  men  blame  his  manners  who  often  says  that  which 
himself  does  not  think,  todo  o  mundo  censura  o  procedi- 
mento  d'aquelle  que  tern  por  costume  dizer  o  que  ndo  tern 


42 


PKONOUNS. 


no  pensamento  ;  Providence  does  not  prosper  the  labours 
of  those  that  slight  their  best  friends,  a  Providencia  ndo 
abenpda  o  trabalho  d1  aquelles  que  desprezdo  os  seas  mel/tores 
amigos. 

The  English  pronoun  such,  followed  by  as  or  that  (but 
not  governed  by  the  verb  substantive  to  be),  is  also  ren- 
dered into  Portuguese  by  aquelle  que,  or  aquelles  que ;  as, 
such  as  do  not  love  virtue  do  not  know  it,  aquelle  or 
aquelles  que  ndo  amdo  a  virtude  ndo  a  conhecem. 

The  pronouns  mo,  isto,  aquillo,  before  que,  are  rendered 
into  English  by  what;  as,  elle  diz  aquillo  que  sabe,  he  says 
what  he  knows. 

Aquelle  is  also  used  to  show  contempt ;  as,  que  quer 
aquelle  homem  ?  What  does  that  man  desire  1 


OF    THE    PRONOUNS   INTERROGATIVE. 

The  pronouns  interrogative  serve  to  ask  questions, 
and  are  as  follows  :  who,  what,  which,  quern,  que,  qual. 


Quern  d  ? 

Quern  vos  disse  isso  ? 

Que  quereis  ? 

Com  que  se  sustenta? 


Que  estais  fazendo  ? 

De  que  se  faz  isto  ? 

Que  livro  e  este  ? 

Que  negocios  tendes  ? 

Que  casa  e? 

De  qual  fallais  vos  ? 

Qual  d'elles  ? 

Quern  or  qual  dos  dois  ? 


EXAMPLES. 

Who  is  it  1 
Who  told  you  so  1 
What  will  you  have  1 
What  do  you  maintain  your- 
self with  1 

What  are  you  doing  1 
From  what  is  this  done  1 
What  book  is  this  1 
What  affairs  have  you  1 
What  house  is  it  ? 
Which  do  you  speak  of? 
Which  of  them? 
Which  of  the  two  1 


PRONOUNS.  43 

These  pronouns  are  thus  declined  : — 
Masculine  and  Feminine. 

SINGULAR  AND  PLURAL. 

Nom.  quern          who  N.  que         what 

Gen.    de  quern     of  whom  G.  de  que    of  what 

Dat.    a  quern       to  whom  D.  a  que     to  what 

Ace.    quern          whom  A.  que         what 

Abl.    de  quern     from  whom  A.  de  que    from  what 

„     par  quern  by  whom  ,,  peloque  by  what. 

Qual  is  used  in  speaking  both  of  persons  and  things, 
and  is  declined  thus  : — 

Masculine  and  Feminine. 

SINGULAR. 

Nom.  qual  which  or  what 

Gen.    de  qual  of  which  or  what 

Dat.    a  qual  to  which  or  what 

Ace.    qual  which  or  what 

Abl.    de  qual  from  which  or  what 

,,       por  qual  by  which  or  what. 

Masculine  and  Feminine. 

PLURAL. 

Nom.  quaes  which  or  what 

Gen.    de  quaes  of  which  or  what 

Dat.    a  quaes  to  which  or  what 

Ace.    quaes  which  or  what 

Abl.    de  quaes  from  which  or  what 

Observe,  that  when  the  word  quer  is  added  to  quern, 
or  qual,  it  quite  alters  the  meaning  ;  quemquer  signifying; 
whoever,  or  any  person,  and  qualquer,  any  one,  whether 
man,  woman,  or  thing  ;  and  sometimes  they  add  the  par- 
ticle que  to  them,  as  quemquer  que,  &c. 


44  PRONOUNS. 

OF    THE    PRONOUNS   RELATIVE. 

Pronouns  relative  are  those  which  show  the  relation 
or  reference  which  a  noun  has  to  what  follows  it.  They 
are  the  following  :  qual,  which  ;  que,  that  or  which  ;  cujo, 
whose ;  quern,  who. 

Qual,  in  a  sense  of  comparison,  is  followed  by  tal,  and 
then  qual  is  rendered  in  English  by  as,  and  tal  by  of. 

N.B.  When  qual  is  only  a  relative,  it  is  declined  with 
the  definite  articles  o  or  a. 

The  pronoun  que  may  be  relative  both  to  persons  and 
things,  and  is  common  to  all  numbers,  genders,  and 
cases ;  as,  o  livro  que,  the  book  which  ;  os  livros  que,  the 
books  which  ;  a  carta  que,  the  letter  which  ;  as  cartas 
que,  the  letters  which ;  o  mestre  que  ensina,  the  master 
who  teaches ;  a  mulher  que  tenho,  the  wife  that  I  have ; 
o  homem  que  eu  amo,  the  man  whom  I  love.  It  is  thus 
declined  :  — 

SINGULAR  AND  PLURAL. 

Nom.  que  which  or  who 

Gen.     de  que  of  which  or  of  whom 

Dat.     a  que  to  which  or  to  whom 

Ace.     que  which  or  whom 

Abl.     de  que  from  which  or  from  whom. 

Que  is  sometimes  a  conjunction ;  as,  creio  que  irei,  I 
believe  that  I  shall  go.  See  the  Syntax. 

The  relative  quern,  who,  is  only  relative  to  persons  ; 
but  in  the  nominative  case  of  the  singular  is  rendered 
into  English  by  he  who  or  who ;  as  quern  falla  deve  con- 
sider ar,  &c.,  he  who  speaks  ought  to  consider,  &c.  ;  cu 
nao  sei  quern,  I  know  not  who. 

Observe,  that  quern  is  common  to  all  numbers,  genders, 
and  cases  ;  but  it  has  no  nominative  in  the  plural. 


PRONOUNS.  45 

SINGULAR  AND  PLURAL. 

Quern  is  declined  thus  : — 

Nom.  quern  he  who,  or  she  who,  or  whoever 

Gen.    de  quern  of  whom 

Dat.     a  quern  to  whom 

Ace.     quern  '  whom 

Abl.     de  quern  from  whom 

„       por  quern  by  whom. 

Quern  sometimes  serves  for  exclamation ;  as,  quern  me 
de'ra  estar  em  casa  !  how  fain  would  I  be  at  home  ! 
Cujo,  cuja,  are  declined  thus  : — 

MASC.  FEM. 

'Nom.  cujo  cuja  whose 

Gen.  de  cujo  de  cuja  of  whose 

Sing.   <  Dat.  a  cvjo  a  cuja  to  whose 

Ace.  cvjo  cuja  whose 

•  Abl.  de  cujo  de  cuja  from  whose. 

The  plural  is  formed  by  adding  s  to  the  singular ;  as, 
cujos,  cujas,  whose,  &c. 

Observe  that  cujo  must  be  followed  by  the  noun  or 
term  to  which  it  refers,  and  with  which  it  agrees  in 
gender,  number,  and  case  :  as,  a  pessoa  cuja  reputaqao  e 
rjrande,  the  person  whose  reputation  is  great ;  o  ce'o  cujo 
soccorro  nunca  falta,  heaven,  whose  assistance  never  fails ; 
cuja  bella  cara,  whose  fair  visage ;  cujas  bellezas,  whose 
beauties ;  a  cujo  pal,  to  whose  father ;  de  cujos  irmaos 
tenho  recebido,  from  whose  brothers  I  have  received. 
Observe  also  that  cujo  is  not  to  be  repeated,  though  the 
terms  to  which  it  refers  be  of  different  number  ;  as,  cuja 
valia  e  obras,  whose  valour  and  deeds. 

Observe,  that  o,  a,  os,  as,  16,  Id,  &c.,  are  also  relative 
pronouns  when  joined  to  verbs.  See  the  Syntax,  chap.  iv. 


46  PRONOUNS. 

OF  THE  IMPROPER  PRONOUNS. 

These  pronouns  are  called  improper,  because  indeed 
they  are  not  properly  pronouns,  although  they  bear  a 
great  resemblance  to  pronouns  as  well  as  to  adjectives. 
They  are  the  following  :— 

Um  one 

Alguem  somebody 

Algum  some 

Ninguem  nobody 

Nenhum  none 

Cadaum  every  one,  each 

Cada  every 

Outro,  outra  other 

Outrem  another  person. 

Qualquer,  any  one ;  whether  man,  or  woman,  or 
thing. 

Qualquer  dos  dois,  either  of  the  two,  or  whichsoever 
of  the  two. 

Quemquer,  whoever,  or  any  person. 

Todo,  all,  or  every.     Tal,  such,  &c. 

Um  has  two  terminations  for  the  two  genders,  viz., 
urn,  uma ;  and  in  the  plural  it  makes  uns,  umas.  It  is 
declinable, 

Alguem  has  only  one  termination,  and  is  declinable. 

Algum  has  two  terminations,  viz.,  algum,  alguma;  and 
in  the  plural,  alguns,  algumas.  It  is  declinable. 

Ninguem  has  only  one  termination  and  is  declinable ; 
ninguem  o  ere,  nobody  believes  it. 

Nenhum  has  two  terminations,  viz.,  nenhum,  nenhuma, 
and  in  the  plural,  nenhuns,  nenhumas  ;  and  is  declinable  : 
nenhum  homem,  no  man ;  de  nenhum  e/eito,  of  no  effect. 

Cada  um  has  two  terminations,  viz.,  cada  um,  cada 
uma  ;  but  it  has  no  plural  and  is  declinable. 


PRONOUNS.  47 

Cada  has  but  one  termination.  It  has  no  plural,  and 
is  declinable :  cada  dia,  every  day ;  cada  mez,  every 
month. 

Outro  has  two  terminations,  viz.,  outro,  outra,  and  in 
the  plural,  outros,  outras.  It  is  declinable. 

Outrem  has  only  one  termination.  It  has  no  plural, 
and  is  declinable. 

Qualquer  has  but  one  termination.  It  makes  quaesque.r 
in  the  plural,  and  is  declined.  Qualquer  is  said  both  of 
persons  and  things. 

Quemquer  has  but  one  termination.  It  has  no  plural, 
and  is  declined.  It  is  rendered  in  English  by  anybody  : 
quemquer  vos  dird,  anybody  will  tell  you.  Quemquer  is 
used  in  speaking  of  a  person. 

Todo  has  two  terminations,  viz.,  todo,  toda,  and  in  the 
plural  todos,  todas.  It  is  declinable,  and  sometimes  taken 
substantively,  and  then  it  signifies  the  ivhole ;  as,  o  todo 
6  maior  que  a  sua  parte,  the  whole  is  bigger  than  its  part. 

Tal  has  only  one  termination.  It  makes  taes  in  the 
plural,  and  it  is  declined  with  the  indefinite  article.  It 
is  common  to  the  masculine  and  to  the  feminine  genders ; 
and  sometimes  it  is  joined  to  qual  ;  as,  tal  qualelle  et  such 
as  it  is. 

Tal  supplies  sometimes  the  place  of  the  person  whose 
name  is  not  specified  ;  as,  um  tal  velhaco  deve  ser  c 
such  a  rogue  ought  to  be  punished. 


48  VERBS. 


CHAPTER    V. 

OF  VEEBS. 

THE  verb  is  a  part  of  speech  which  serves  to  express 
that  which  is  attributed  to  the  subject  in  denoting  the 
being  or  condition  of  the  things  and  persons  spoken  of, 
the  actions  which  they  do,  or  the  impressions  they 
receive. 

The  first  and  the  most  general  division  of  Verbs  is 
into  personal  and  impersonal. 

A  verb  personal  is  conjugated  by  three  persons. 

EXAMPLE. 

{eu  amo  I  love 

tu-amas  thou  lovest 

elle  ama  he  loves 

{ncs  amamos  we  love 

vos  amais  you  love 

dies  amcio*  they  love 

A  verb  impersonal  is  conjugated  by  the  third  person 
of  the  singular  number  only  ;  as,  chove,  it  rains ;  convent, 
it  behoves. 

A  verb,  considered  in  regard  to  syntax,  is  of  four 
sorts,  viz.,  active,  passive,  neuter,  and  reciprocal. 

Some  of  the  verbs  are  regular  and  others  irregular. 

*  The  termination  in  Go  (often  found  written  ad),  in  the  third 
person  plural  in  Portuguese  verbs,  is  at  present  most  generally 
printed  am;  whilst  the  form  So  is  kept  for  words  that  are  not 
verbs,  the  three  modes  of  wiiting  this  termination  having  the  same 
value. 


VERBS.  49 

Some  are  also  called  auxiliary  verbs.  We  shall  give 
their  definitions  in  their  proper  places. 

Before  you  begin  to  learn  the  conjugations,  it  will  be 
proper  to  observe,  that  all  the  verbs  may  be  conjugated 
with  the  personal  pronouns,  eu,  tu,  elle,  &c.,  or  without 
them. 

OP   THE   AUXILIARY   VERBS. 

The  auxiliary  verbs  are  so  called  because  they  aid 
the  conjugation  of  other  verbs.  They  are  four  in  Por- 
tuguese :  viz.,  haver,  ter,  to  have  ;  ser,  estar,  to  be.  The 
auxiliary  verb  ser,  to  be,  is  also  called  the  verb  sub- 
stantive, because  it  affirms  what  the  subject  is,  and  is 
always  followed  by  a  noun  that  particularises  what  that 
subject  is  ;  as,  ser  rico,  prudente,  douto,  to  be  rich,  wise, 
learned,  &c. 

CONJUGATION    OF    THE    AUXILIARY   VERB    TER  OR  HA  VERy 

TO    HAVE. 

The  Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

(  eu  tenho,  or  hei  I  have 

Sing.   4  tu  tens,  or  has  .  tbou  hast 

1  elle  tern,  or  ha  he  has  or  hath, 

(  nds  tonos,  or  havemos,  or  hemos  we  have 

Plur.   -|  v6s  tendes,  or  haveis,  or  heis  you  have 

I  elles  teem,  or  hao  they  have 

PRETERIMPERFECT. 

f  eu  tinha,  or  havia  I  had 

Sing.   4  tu  tinhas,  or  havias  thou  hadst 

I  elle  tinha,  or  havia  he  had 

T  n6s  tinhamos,  or  haviamos  we  had 

Plur.    4  vds  tinheis,  or  havieis  you  had 

{  elles  tinhao,  or  haviao          ';  ;  tliey 


E 


VERBS. 


Sing. 


Plur. 


Sing. 


Plur. 


Sing. 


PRETERPERFECT  DEFINITE. 

eu  tive,  or  houve 

tu  tiveste,  or  houveste 

elle  teve,  or  houve 

nds  tivemos,  or  houvemos 
v6s  tivestes,  or  houvestes 
elles  tiverao,  or  houverao 


PRETERPERFECT. 


eu  tenho  tido 
tu  tens  tido 
elle  tern  tido 

n6s  temos  tido 
vos  tendes  tido 
dies  teem  tido 


PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

eu  tinha  tido 

tu  tinhas  tido 

elle  tinha  tido 
[n6s  tinhamos  tido 
Plur.  -|  v6s  tinheis  tido 
\elles  tinhdo  tido 


I  had 

thou  hadst 
he  had 

we  had 
you  had 
they  had 

I  have  had 
thou  hast  had 
he  has  had 
we  have  had 
you  have  had 
thev  have  had 


I  had  had 
thou  hadst  had 
he  had  had 
we  had  had 
you  had  had 
they  had  had. 


This  tense  may  also  be  conjugated  thus  :  tive'ra,  tiveras, 
tivera,  tiveramos,  tivereis,  tiverao. 

FIRST  FUTURE. 

f  eu  terei,  or  haverei  I  shall  or  will  have 

Sing.    4  tu  terds,  or  haver  as  thou  shalt  or  wilt  have 

I  elle  terd,  or  haverd  he  shall  or  will  have 

{n6s  teremos,  or  haveremos  we  shall  or  will  have 
v6s  tereis,  or  havereis         ye  shall  or  will  have 
elles  tercio,  or  haverdo        they  shall  or  will  have 


VERBS.  :">! 

SECOND  FUTURE. 

Sing,  eu  Jiei  de  ter,  or  haver,  &c.     I  must  have,  <fcc. 

THIRD  FUTURE. 

Sing,  eu  haverei  de  ter,  or  haver,  &c.     I  shall   be   obliged 

to  have,  tfec. 

FOURTH  FUTURE. 

Sing,  eu  havia  de  ter,-  or  haver,  <fec.     I  was  to  have,  &c. 


Imperative  Mood. 

(  tern  tu,  or  hajas  tu  have  thou 

'*  \  tenha  elle,  or  haja  elle  let  him  have 

[  tenhdmos,  or  hajdmos  nos  let  us  have 

Plur.  -|  tende,  or  havei  v6s  have  ye 

I  tenhao,  or  hajdo  elles  let  them  have 

The   imperative   has   no   first   person,    because  it  is 
impossible  to  command  oneself. 


Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 
I  join  them  together  because  their  tenses  are  similar. 

PRESENT. 

(  que  eu  tenha,  or  haja  that  I  may  have 

Sing.  -[  que  tu  tenhas,  or  hajas          that  thou  mayest  have 
I  que  elle  tenha,  or  haja  that  he  may  have 

que  n6s  tenhdmos,  or  hajdmos  that  we  may  have 
Plur.  -{  que  vos  tenhais,  or  hajais        that  ye  may  have 
que  elles  tenltao,  or  hajao        that  they  may  have 


52 


Sing 


\ 


Plur. 


VERBS. 
FIRST  PRETERIMPERFECT. 

que  eu  tive'ra  or  tivesse,  hou- 

vera  or  houvesse 
que  tu  tiveras  or  tivesses,  hou- 

veras  or  houvesses 
I  que  elle  tive'ra  or  tivesse,  hou- 

vera  or  houvesse   . 
que  n6'st^^eframosor  tivessemos, 

houveramos  or  houvessemos 
que   v6s  tivereis   or   tivesseis, 

houvereis  or  houvesseis 
que  elles  tiverdo  or  tivessem, 

houverdo  or  houvessem 


that  I  had,  should, 
would,  could,  or 
might  have,  &c. 


that  we  had,  should, 
would,  could,  07- 
might  have,  &c. 


SECOND  PRETERIMPERFECT. 


eu  teria,  or  haveria 
Sing.  -<J  tu  terias,  or  haverias 
(  elle  teria,  or  haveria 
(  nos  teriamos,  or  haveriamos 
Plur.  v'  vos  terieis,  or  haverieis 
terido,  or  haverido 


I  should,  would,  or 
could  have,  &c. 

we   should,    would, 
or  could  have,  &c. 


PRETERPERFECT. 

that  I  have  had 
that  thou  hast  had 

(  que  elle  tenha  tido,  or  havido        that  he  has  had 
que  nos  tenhdmos  tido  or  havido   that  we  have  had 
que  vos  tenhais  tido,  or  havido      that  you  have  had 
que  elles  tenhdo  tido,  or  havido     that  they  have  had 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

It  is  compounded  of  the  first  preterimperfect  subjunc 
live  and  the  participle. 


Sing, 


Plur. 


que  eu  tenha  tido,  or  havido 
tenhas  tido,  or  havido 


VERBS. 


53 


(  se  €u  tivera  or  tive"sse 
Sing.  <  se  tu  tive"ras  or  tivesses 

\  se  elle  tivera  or  tivesse 

(  se  nos  tiveramos  or  tivessemos 
Plur.  <  se  v6s  tivereis  or  tivesseis 

\  se  dies  tiverdo  or  tivessem 


-  tidoj 


if  I  had  had, 
&c. 


SECOND  PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

It  is  compounded  of  the  second  preterimperfect  sub- 
junctive and  the  participle. 

/  eu  teria 
Sing.  1  tu  terias 

(  elle  teria 

(  n6s  teriamos 
Plur.  1  vos  terieis 

(  elle  terido 


f  se  eu  tiver 
Sing.  1      tu  tiveres 

\      elle  tiver 

i  se  nos  tivermos 
Plur.  <       vos  tiverdes 

[      elles  tiverem 


FIRST  FUTURE. 

if  I  shall  have 
thou  shalt  have 
he  shall  have 

if  we  shall  have 
you  shall  have 
they  shall  have 


The  verb  Haver  is  conjugated  also  thus :  houver,  hou- 
veres,  houver  ;  houvermos,  houverde^  ho°iverem.  See  Syntax 
of  the  Auxiliary  Verbs. 


SECOND  FUTURE. 


It  is  composed  of  the  first  future  and  the  participle. 


VERBS. 


Plur. 


se  eu  tiver 
tu  tiver  es 
elle  tiver 


se 


vos  tiverdes 
elles  tiverem 


-  tido,  if  I  shall  have  had,  &cv 


Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

ter      to  have 

PBETEEPERFECT. 

ter  tido      to  have  had. 

PARTICIPLES. 

Preterit.  Sing,  tido,  tida         Plur.  tidos,  tidas,  had. 

FUTURE. 

ha  de  ter          that  is  to  have. 


GERUNDS. 
tendo,  having,  or  in  having         tendo  tido,  having  had. 

,  SUPINE. 

The  supine  is  supplied  by  the  prepositions  a  or  para 
and  the  verb  in  the  infinitive  ;  as, 

para  ter          to  have. 

In  like  manner  are  conjugated  its  compounds  contenh 
detenho,  mantenho,  &c. 

REMARKS  UPON  THE  AUXILIARY  VERB  ter,  TO  HAVE. 

The  verb  ter,  to  have,  is  an  auxiliary  or  helping  verb, 
which  serves  to  conjugate  other  verbs  :  examples,  ter  lido, 


VERBS.  55 

to  have  read  ;  nos  temos  feitoy  we  have  done  ;  elles  teem 
visto,  they  have  seen,  <tc. 

When  the  verb  ter  is  followed  by  the  participle  que, 
before  an  infinitive  mood,  it  denotes  the  duty,  inclination, 
&c.,  of  doing  anything:  as,  que  tender  que  fazer?  what 
have  you  to  do  ?  tenho  que  fazer  uma  visita,  I  must  pay  a 
visit ;  elle  tern  muito  que  dizer-vos,  he  has  a  great  many 
things  to  tell  you. 

OF    THE    AUXILIARY    VERB    haver. 

The  verb  haver  is  seldom  used  now  as  an  auxiliary  in 
Portuguese,  since  ter  is  an  auxiliary  to  itself,  as  well  as  to 
all  other  verbs. 

The  verb  haver,  with  the  particle  de  after  it,  denotes 
a  firm  resolution,  possibility,  or  necessity  of  doing  any- 
thing, as,  eu  hei  de  ter,  I  must  have ;  eu  hei  de  cantar,  I 
will  sing ;  eu  havia  de  fallar,  I  was  to  speak  ;  also  before 
the  passive  voice,  as,  o  principe  ha  de  ser  respeitado,  the 
prince  ought  to  be,  or  must  be  respected. 

The  same  verb  haver  implies  also  duty  without  the 
particle  de  ;  but  then  it  is  put  after  the  verb  to  which  it 
is  auxiliary  :  thus,  dar-vos-hei,  I  will  give  you;  dar-lhe- 
hei,  I  will  give  to  him,  &c.  In  which  examples  you  may 
observe,  that  the  verb  haver  is  put  after  the  verb  and  the 
pronouns  conjunctive,  te,  Ihe,  &c.,  and  sometimes  it  is  put 
after  the  verbs  and  the  pronoun  mixed ;  as,  mandar-vol-o- 
hei,  I  will  send  it  to  you.  In  the  foregoing  examples  the 
verb  haver  may  be  put  before  the  other  verb  ;  but  then  it 
requires  the  particle  de,  and  has  a  different  meaning :  as, 
in  the  first  example,  you  may  say,  hei  de  dar-vos,  I 
must  give  to  you.  Observe,  also,  that  when  the  indica- 
tive present  of  the  verb  haver  is  auxiliary  to  other  verbs, 
as  in  the  foregoing  examples,  you  must  cut  off  the  last 


.56 


VERBS. 


letters  ei  from  the  future  of  the  verbs,  and  say  dar-lhe-hei, 
or  hei  de  dar-lhe ;  but  not  darei-lhe-hei,  nor  hei  de  darei- 
Ihe.  When  the  preterimperf  ect  havia  is  to  be  auxiliary  to 
any  verb,  and  it  is  to  be  placed  after  it,  you  must  make 
use  of  hia,  kias,  hia,  hiamos,  hieis,  hido;  and  say,  dar-lhe- 
hia,  hias,  &c.,  but  not  dar-lhe-havia,  havias,  &c.,  I  should 
give  to  him,  thou  shouldst,  &c. 

To  express  interrogation,  put  the  personal  pronoun 
after  the  verb,  as  in  English,  thus,  terei  eu  ?  shall  I  have  1 
temos  nds  ?  have  we  1  tens  tu  ?  hast  thou  ?  tern  die  ?  has 
he  ?  Sometimes  the  pronouns  are  omitted ;  as,  que  far- 
emos  ?  what  shall  we  do  ?  cantaremos  ?  shall  we  sing  1 

Haver  is  sometimes  rendered  in  English  by  to  become  ; 
as,  que  ha  de  ser  de  mim  ?  what  will  become  of  me  ? 

When  we  speak  by  negation,  we  must  use  the  word 
ndo  before  the  verb ;  as,  ndo  tenho,  I  have  not ;  vds  nao 
conheceis,  you  do  not  know,  &c. 


CONJUGATION    OF   THE   AUXILIARY   VERB   SER,  OR   ESTAR, 


TO    BE. 


Indicative  Mood. 


PRESENT. 


(  eu  sou,  or  estou 
Sing.  -|  tu  es,  or  estds 
{  elle  e,  or  estd 


(  nds  somos,  or  estamos 
-j  vds  sois,  or  estais 
[  elles  sdo,  or  estdo 


PBP:TKRIMPERFECT. 


T  eu  era,  or  estava 
Sing.  4       eras,  or  estavas 
[      era,  or  estava 


T  am 
thou  art 
he  is 
we  are 
you  are 
they  are 


I  was 
thou  wast 
he  was 


VERBS. 


57 


rf  nos  eramos,  or  estavamos 
Plur.  -|       erm,  or  estaveis 
\      erdo,  or  estavdo 


PRETERPERFECT  DEFINITE. 


/  <°w  fui,  or 
Sing.  -       foste,  or  estiveste 
\ 


Plur.  - 


foi,  or 
nos  fomos,  or  estivemos 
fostes,  or  estivestes 
fordo,  or  estiverdo 


we  were 
you  were 
they  were 

I  was 
thou  wast 
he  was 
we  were 
you  were 
they  were 


PRETERPERFECT. 


The  preterperfect  is  composed  of  the  present  indica- 
tive of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter,  to  have,  and  its  own  parti- 
ciple, sido  or  estadoi, 


PRETERPLUPERFECT. 


The  tense  is  compounded  of  the  preterimperfect  indica- 
tive;  and  the  participle  sido  or  estado. 


{eu  tinha  sido,  or  estado 
tinhas  sido,  or  estado 
tinha  sido,  or  estado 
(  nos  tinhamos  sido,  or  estado 
Plur.  -!       tin/ieis  sido,  or  estado 
{_      tinlmo  sido,  or  estado 


I  had  been 
thou  hadst  been 
he  had  been 
we  had  been 
you  had  been 


they  had  been 

It  may  also  be  conjugated  thus  :  fora,  or  e  stiver  a  ; 
foras,  or  estiveras  ;  fora,  or  estivera ;  foramos,  or  estivera- 
mos  ;  foreis,  or  estivereis;  fordo,  or  estiverdo. 


FUTURE. 


eu  serei,  or  estarei 
Sing,  -f       serds,  or  estards 
sera,  or  estard 


I  shall  or  will  be 
thou  shalt  be 
he  shall  be 


58 


VERBS. 


n6s  seremos,  or  estaremos 
Plur.  -|       sereis,  or  estareis 
serdo,  or  estardo 


Sing. 


Imperative  Mood. 

se  tu,  or  esto 

sc/a,  or  esteja  elle 
C  sejamos,  or  estejamos  nos 
Plur.  •]  secfe,  or  estai  vos 

\  sejdo,  or  estejdo  elles 


be  thou 
let  him  be 
let  us  be 
be  ye 
let  them  be 


Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

{que  eu  seja,  or  esteja     that  I  may  be,  or  that  I  be 
sejas,  or  estejas  thou  mayest  be 

seja,  or  esteja  he  may  be,  &c. 

que  nds  sejdmos,  or  estejdmos       that  we  may  be 
sejais,  or  estejais  you  may  be 

,  or  estejdo  they  may  be 


FIRST  PRETERIMPEBFECT. 


Sing. 


Plur. 


)  that 

! 


que  eu  fora  or  fosse, 

estivera  or  estivesse 
foras  or  fosses, 

estiveras  or  estivesses 
fora  or  fosse, 

estivera  or  estivesse 
que  n6s  foramos  or  fossemos, 

estiveramos  or  estivessemos  ) 
fdreis  or  fosseis, 

estivereis  or  estivesseis 
fordo  or  fossem, 

estiverdo  or  estivessem 


I    were,    or 
might  be 

thou  wert 


he  were 
>  that  we  were 


you  we 


they  were 


VERBS.  59 

SECOND  PRETEBIMPEBFECT. 

eu  seria,  or  estaria  I  should  or  would  be 

Sing.  \       serias,  or  estarias  thou  shouldst  be 

seria,  or  estaria  he  should  be 

seriamos,  or  estariamos  we  should  be 

Plur.  -|       serieis,  or  estarieis  you  should  be 

seriao,  or  estariao  they  should  be 

PRETEBPERFECT. 

It  is  compounded  of  the  present  conjunctive  of  the 
auxiliary  verb  ter,  and  its  own  participle  sido,  or  estado. 

que  eu  tenha  sido,  or  estado  that  I  have  been 
Sing.-J              tenhas  sido,  or  estado  thou  hast  been 

tenha  sido,  &c.  he  has  been 

nos  tenhdmos  sido,  &c.  we  have  been 

Plur.-[  tenhais  sido,  &c.  you  have  been 

tenhdo  sido,  &c.  they  have  been 

PBETERPLUPERFECT. 

It  is  compounded  of  the  first  preterimperfect  subjunc- 
tive of  the  verb  ter,  and  its  own  participle. 

C  se  eu  tivera,  or  tivesse  sido,  or  estado     if  I  had  been 
Sing. A  tiveras,  <kc.  thou  hadst  been 

tivera,  &c.  he  had  been 

f  nos  tiveramos,  &c.  we  had  been 

Plur.-          tivereis,  &c.  you  had  been 

tiverao,  &c.  they  had  been 

SECOND  PRETEBPLUPERFECT. 

Compounded  of  the  second  preterimperfect  subjunc- 
tive of  the  verb  ter,  and  its  own  participle  sido,  or  estado. 


60 


Sing.-       terias,  &c. 


VERHS. 

eu  teria  sido,  or  estado  I  should  or  would  have  been 

thou  shouldst  have  been 
he  should  have  been 
we  should  have  been 
you  should  have  been 
they  should  have  been 


I 

teria,  &c. 

Pluiv 

teriamos,  &c. 
terieis,  &c. 
teriao,  &c. 

Plur. 


FIRST  FUTURE. 

(quando  eu  for,  or  estiver 

fores,  or  estiveres 
I  for,  or  estiver 

[  nos  forvnos,  or  estivermos 

fordes,  or  estiverdes 
forem,  or  estiverem 

SECOND  FUTURE. 


when  I  shall  be 

thou  shalt  be 
he  shall  be 
we  shall  be 
you  shall  be 
they  shall  be 


Compounded  of  the  future  subjunctive  of  the  verb  ter 
and  its  own  participle. 


Sing. 


Plur. 


quando  eu  tiver  sido,  or  estado  when  I  shall  have 

been 

tiveres  sido,  &c.  thou  shalt  have 

been 

tiver  sido,  &c.  he  shall  have 

been 

nos  tivermos  sido,  &c. 


tiverdes  sido,  &c. 
tiver  em  sido,  &c. 


we       shall     have 

been 
you  shall  have 

been 
they  shall  have 

been 


VERBS.  6  1 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

ser,  or  estar         to  be 

PRETEBPERFECT. 

ter  sido,  or  estado         to  have  been 
Participles. 

PRETERIT. 

sido,  or  estado          been 

FUTURE. 

que  ha  de  ser,  or  estar         that  is  to  be 

GERUNDS. 

sendo,  or  estando  being 

siWo,  or  estado         having  been 

SUPINE. 
para  ser,  or  estar         to  be 


REMARKS    UPON    THE    VERBS   S€T  AND 

There  is  a  considerable  difference  between  these  verbs, 
ser  and  estar,  both  in  Portuguese  and  Spanish.  In 
English  there  is  no  word  to  distinguish  them,  being 
both  rendered  into  English  by  to  be.  Ser  signifies  the 
proper  and  inseparable  essence  of  a  thing,  its  quality  or 
quantity  ;  ser  homem,  to  be  a  man  ;  ser  bom,  to  be  good  ; 
ser  alto,  to  be  tall  ;  ser  largo,  to  be  wide  ;  ser  branco,  to 
be  white,  &c.  But  estar  denotes  a  place,  or  any  adventi- 
tious quality  :  as,  estar  em  Londres,  to  be  in  London  ; 
estar  de  saude,  to  be  in  health  ;  esta  frio,  to  be  cold  ; 


62  VERBS. 

estar  quente,  to  be  warm ;  estar  doente,  to  be  sick ;  estar 
enfadado,  to  be  angry  ;  estar  alegre,  to  be  merry,  &c. 

Estar  may  be  used  before  the  gerund,  but  not  ser; 
therefore  you  may  say,  estou  fallando,  lendo,  &c.,  I  am 
speaking,  reading,  &c.,  but  not  sou  fallando,  &c. 

THE  THREE  CONJUGATIONS  OF  REGULAR  ACTIVE  VERBS. 

A  regular  verb  is  such  as  is  confined  to  general  rules 
in  its  conjugation. 

A  verb  active  denotes  the  action  or  impression  of  the 
subject,  and  governs  a  noun  which  is  the  object  of  that 
action  or  impression ;  as,  amar  a  virtude,  to  love  virtue  ; 
receler  cartas,  to  receive  letters. 

The  regular  Portuguese  verbs  have  three  different 
terminations  in  the  infinitive  ;  viz.,  in  ar,  er,  ir:  as,  amar, 
to  love  ;  temer,  to  fear  ;  admittir,  to  admit. 

AN    EASY    METHOD    OF    LEARNING   TO    CONJUGATE    THE 
PORTUGUESE    VERBS. 

I  have  reduced  all  the  tenses  of  the  Portuguese  verbs 
to  eight ;  four  of  which  are  general,  and  have  the  same 
terminations  in  all  the  verbs  ;  and  the  other  four  may  be 
likewise  made  general  by  changing  some  letters,  and  all 
the  conjugations  reduced  to  one. 

The  general  tenses  are  the  future  indicative,  the  first 
and  second  preterimperfect  subjunctive,  and  the  first 
future  subjunctive. 

The  future  indicative  is  terminated  in  all  the  verbs 
in  rei,  rds,  rd  ;  remos,  reis,  rdo. 

The  imperfect  subjunctive,  in  ra  or  sse,  ras  or  sses,  ra 
or  sse  ;  ramos  or  ssemos,  reis  or  sse  is,  rao  or  ssem. 

The  second  imperfect,  in  ria,  rias,  ria;  riamos,  rieis,  ri 

The  first  subjunctive,  in  es,  mos,  des,  em. 


VERBS.  63 

I  have  only  given  the  termination  of  the  second  per- 
son singular  of  the  future  subjunctive,  because  the  first 
and  third  of  the  same  number  are  like  their  respective 
infinitives  of  the  three  conjugations,  which,  however, 
keep  both  their  last  consonant  and  vowel  before  the 
terminations  I  have  marked  for  the  second  person  sin- 
gular, and  for  the  whole  plural.  As  to  the  future  in- 
dicative, you  have  only  to  add  ei  to  the  respective 
present  infinitive  of  the  three  conjugations,  in  order  to 
form  the  first  person  singular ;  and  if  you  add  to  the 
same  infinitive  present  as,  you  will  form  the  second 
person  singular  of  it,  and  so  of  all  the  rest,  by  adding 
to  the  infinitive  present  a,  emos,  eis,  do. 

The  imperfect  subjunctive  has  two  terminations  for 
every  person,  both  in  the  singular  and  plural ;  but  if  you 
cut  off  the  last  consonant,  r,  of  the  infinitive,  and  then 
add  to  it  the  terminations  above  mentioned,  you  form  the 
imperfect  subjunctive,  according  to  its  two  different 
terminations.  Lastly,  if  you  cut  off  the  last  consonant 
of  the  infinitive,  and  add  to  it  the  terminations  above 
mentioned,  you  will  form  the  second  imperfect  subjunc- 
tive. 

The  present  indicative  of  the  three  conjugations  is 
formed  by  changing  the  last  letters  of  the  infinitive,  viz., 
ar,  er,  ir,  into  o  ;  as  amo,  entendo,  admitto,  from  a  mar, 
entender,  admittir. 

The  preterimperfect  indicative  is  formed  in  the  first 
conjugation  by  changing  the  last  consonant  of  the  in- 
finitive, viz.  r,  into  va,  vas,  va,  vamos,  veis,  vdo ;  but  in 
the  second  conjugation  it  is  formed  by  changing  the  ter- 
mination er  of  the  infinitive  into  ia,  ias,  ia,  iamos,  ieis, 
ido;  and  in  the  third  by  changing  the  last  consonant,  r, 
of  the  infinitive  into  a,  as,  a,  amos,  m,  do. 

The  perfect  definite  in  the  first  conjugation  is  formed 


64  VERBS- 

by  changing  the  termination  ar  of  the  infinitive  into  eir 
aste,  ou,  dmos,  dstes,  drdo ;  and  in  the  second  conjuga- 
tion it  is  formed  by  changing  the  termination  er  of  the 
infinitive  into  i,  este,  eo,  emos,  estes,  erao.  In  the  third 
conjugation,  the  same  tense  is  formed  by  changing  the 
termination  ir  of  the  infinitive  into  i,  iste,  io,  imos,  istes, 
irdo. 

The  present  subjunctive  in  the  first  conjugation  in 
formed  by  changing  the  termination  ar  of  the  infinitive 
into  6)  es,  e,  emos,  eis,  em  ;  and  in  the  second  conjugation 
it  is  formed  by  changing  the  termination  er  of  the 
infinitive  into  a,  as,  a  amos,  ais,  do.  In  the  third  con- 
jugation, the  same  tense  is  formed  by  changing  the  ter- 
mination ir  of  the  infinitive  into  the  same  terminations, 
a,  as,  a,  &c. 

As  to  the  imperative  mood,  you  have  only  to  observe 
that  the  second  person  singular  is  always  the  same  as 
the  third  person  singular  of  the  present  indicative,  in  all 
the  conjugations. 

The  participles  of  the  pretcrperfect  tense  in  the  first 
conjugation  are  formed  by  changing  the  last  consonant, 
r,  of  the  infinitive  into  do  of  the  masculine,  and  da  for 
the  feminine  ;  and  into  dos,  das,  for  the  plural ;  but  when 
you  come  to  verbs  of  the  second  conjugation,  you 
change  the  termination  r  of  the  infinitive  into  ido, 
ida,  &c. 

In  the  third  conjugation,  the  last  consonant,  r,  of  the 
infinitive  must  be  changed  into  do  for  the  masculine,  da 
for  the  feminine,  &c. 


VERBS.  65 

FIRST  CONJUGATION  OP  THE  VERBS  IN  AR. 

Indicative  Mood.          ' 

PRESENT. 

{eu  amo  I  love 

amas  thou  lovest 

ama  he  loves 

fn6s  amamos  we  love 

Plur.  J        amais  you  love 

[       amao  they  love 

PEETEBIMPERFECT. 

{eu  amava  I  did  love 

amavas  thou  didst  love 

amava  he  did  love 

{n6s  amavamos  we  did  love 

amaveis  you  did  love 

amavdo  they  did  love 

PRETERPEEFECT  DEFINITE. 

feu   amei  I  loved 

Sing.  -        amaste  thou  lovedst 

[       amou  he  loved 

{nos  amdmos  we  loved 

amdstes  you  loved 

amdrao  they  loved 

PRETERPERFECT. 

This  tense  is  composed  of  the  participle  amado  and 
the  present  indicative  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

reu   tenho  amado  I  have  loved 

Sing.  \        tens  amado  thou  hast  loved 

tern  amado  he  has  loved 

p 


66 


Plur. 


VERBS. 


rnos  temos  amado 
tendes  amado 

% 

teem  amado 


we  have  loved 
you  have  loved 
they  have  loved 


PRETERPLUPERFECT. 


This  tense  is  composed  of  the  participle  amado  and 
the  imperfect  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

N.B.  It  may  be  conjugated  thus  :  amdra,  amdras, 
amdra,  amdramos,  amdreis,  amdrdo,  or 


'eu   tinha  amado 
Sing.  -I        tinhas  amado 
tinha  amado 
'nos  tinhamos  amado 
Plur.  -I        tinheis  amado 
tinhao  amado 


I  had  loved 
thou  hadst  loved 
he  had  loved 
we  had  loved 
you  had  loved 
they  had  loved 


FUTURE. 


Sing. 


Plur. 


reu  amarei 
amards 
amard 

nos  amaremos 
amareis 
amardo 


I  shall  or  will  love 
thou  shalt  love 
he  shall  love 
we  shall  love 
you  shall  love 
they  shall  love 


Imperative  Mood. 


ama  tu 
ame  elle 
amemos  nos 
amai  vos 
amem  elles 


love  thou 
let  him  love 
let  us  love 
love  you 
let  them  love 


VERBS.  67 

Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

rque  eu  ame  that  I  may  love 
Sing.  \              ames  thou  mayst  love 

ame  he  may  love 

rque  nos  amemos  we  may  love 

Plur.  ^  ameis  you  may  love 

amem  they  may  love 

FIRST  PRETERIMPERFECT. 

'que  eu  amdra,  or  amasse  that  I  might  or  could  love 

Sing.  -[  amdras,  or  amasses  thou  mightest  love 

amdra,  or  amasse  he  might  love 

nos  amdramosj  or  we  might  love 
pi                           amassemos 

amdreis,  or  amasseis  you  might  love 

amdrdo,  or  amassem  they  might  love 

When  we  find  the  conjunction  (f  before  the  indicative 
imperfect,  we  must  use  the  imperfect  of  the  subjunctive 
or  optative,  when  we  speak  by  way  of  wish  or  desire  :  as, 
if  I  did  love,  se  eu  amasse,  or  amdra,  and  not  the  preter- 
imperfect  indicative,  se  eu  amava ;  if  I  had,  se  eu  tivera, 
tivesse,  and  not  se  eu  tinha  ;  and  so  in  all  the  verbs. 

SECOND  PRETERIMPERFECT. 

{eu    amaria  I  should  love 

amarias  thou  shouldst  love 

amaria  he  should  love 

(nos  amariamos  we  should  love 

Plur.  4        amarieis  you  should  love 

amarido  they  should  love 

PRETERPERFECT. 

It  is  composed  of  the  participle  amado  and  the  present 
subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 


68 


VERBS. 


{que  eu  tenha  amado 
tenhas  amado 
tenha  amado 
fque  nos  ten/idmos  amado 
Plur.^  tenhais  amado 

tenhtio  amado 


that  I  have  loved 
thou  hast  loved 
he  has  loved 

we  have  loved 
you  have  loved 
they  have  loved 


PRETERPLUPERFECT. 


It  is  composed  of  the  participle  amado  and  the  first 
preterimperfect  subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

se  eu  tivera,  or  tivesse  amado  if  I  had  loved 

tiveras,  or  tivesses  amado  thou  hadst  loved 

tivera,  or  tivesse  amado  he  had  loved 

'se  nos  tiveramos,  or  tivessemos  amado    \ve  had  loved 
tivereis,  or  tivesseis  amado  you  had  loved 

tiverdOy  or  tivessem  amado  they  had  loved 

SECOND  PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

It  is  composed  of  the  participle  amado  and  the  second 
preterimperfect  subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 


feu   ter ia  amado 
Sing.-!        terias  amado 
[       teria  amado 

{nos  teriamos  amado 
terieis  amado 
terido  amado 


I  should  have  loved 
thou  shouldst  have  loved 
he  should  have  loved 
•we  should  have  loved 
you  should  have  loved 
they  should  have  loved. 


FUTURE. 

fquando  eu  amar 
Sing.-!  amares 

[  amar 

fquando  nos  amarmos 


Plur. 


I 


1 


amardes 
amarem 


when  I  shall  love 

thou  shalt  love 
he  shall  love 
we  shall  love 
you  shall  love 
they  shall  love 


VERBS.  69 

SECOND  FUTURE. 

It  is  composed  of  the  participle  amado  and  the  future 
subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

.  Cquando  eu  tiver  amado       when  I  shall  have  loved 
s  -I  tiveres  amado  thou  shalt  have  loved 


tiver  amado  he  shall  have  loved 

{quandonostivermos  amado  we  shall  have  loved 

tiverdes  amado  you  shall  have  loved 

tiverem  amado  they  shall  have  loved 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

amar         to  love 

PRETERPERFECT. 

ter  amado         to  have  loved 


Participles. 

PRESENT. 

que  ama,  or  amante         that  loves 

PRETERIT. 

masc.  amado,  fern,  amada       Plur.  amadost  amadas,  loved 

FUTURE. 

que  ha  de  amar         that  is  to  love 

GERUNDS. 

amando         loving 
Undo  amado         having  loved 

SUPINE. 

para  amar         to  love 


70  VERBS. 


the  verbs  terminating  in  the  infinitive  in  car 
take  qu  in  those  tenses  where  the  c  would  otherwise  meet 
with  the  vowel  e  ;  and  those  terminating  in  the  infinitive 
in  gar  take  an  u  in  those  tenses  where  the  g  would  other- 
wise meet  with  the  same  vowel  e  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the 
first  person  singular  of  the  preterperfect  definite,  in  the 
third  person  singular,  in  the  first  and  third  plural  of  the 
imperative,  and  in  the  whole  present  subjunctive,  which 
are  the  tenses  I  shall  give  by  way  of  example  in  the  verbs 
peccar  and  pagar. 

Peccar,  TO  SIN. 

PRETERPERFECT  DEFINITE. 

eu  pequei,  I  sinned,  &c.,  instead  of  peccei. 

Imperative  Mood. 

peque  elle,  let  him  sin  ;  pequemos  nos,  let  us  sin  ;  pequem 
elles,  let  them  sin  ;  and  not  pecce  elle,  &c. 

PRESENT  SUBJUNCTIVE. 

que  eu  peque,  tu  peques,  that  I  may  sin  ;  and  not  que  eu 
pecce,  pecces,  &c. 

Pagar,  TO  PAY. 

PRETERPERFECT  DEFINITE. 

eu  paguei         I  paid,  &c. 

Imperative  Mood. 
pague  elle,  paguemos  nos,  paguem  elles,  let  him  pay,  &c. 

PRESENT  SUBJUNCTIVE. 

que  eu  pague,  pagues,  pague,  paguemos,  pagueis,  paguem, 
that  I  may  pay,  &c.;  and  not  page,  pages,  &c. 

The  other  tenses  are  conjugated  like  amar. 


VERBS. 


71 


REGULAR   VERBS   IN   (IT. 


Abafar,  to  choke,  or  to  smother 
Abalar,  to  shake 
Abanar,  to  fan 
AbastaTj  to  satiate 
Abaixar,  to  let  down 
Aben^oar,  to  bless 
Abocanhar,  to  carp 
Abominar,  to  abominate 
Abotoar,  to  button 
Acabar,  to  finish 
Admoestar,  to  admonish 

Azedar,  to 


Afrontar,  to  abuse 
Agarrar,  to  lay  hold  of 
Alagar,  to  overflow 
Amaldic(oar,  to  curse 
Annular,  to  annul 
Apressar,  to  hasten 
Aquentar,  to  warm 
Argumentar,  to  argue 
Assoprar,  to  blow 
^far,  to  tie 
Avassalar,  to  subdue 
sour 


OF    THE   VERBS    PASSIVE. 

Before  we  proceed  to  the  second  conjugation,  it  is 
necessary  to  know  that  the  passive  verbs,  which  express 
the  suffering  of  an  action,  are  nothing  more  than  the 
participles  of  active  verbs,  conjugated  with  the  verb  ser, 
to  be. 

EXAMPLE. 

PRESENT  TENSE. 

feu  sou  amado  I  am  loved 

Sing.-j  tu  es  amado  thou  art  loved 

\elle  e  amado  he  is  loved 

fnos  somos  amados  we  are  loved 

Plur.-j  vos  sois  amados  you  are  loved 

Belles  sdo  amados  they  are  loved 

and  so  throughout  the  other  moods  and  tenses. 


72 


VERBS. 


SECOND   CONJUGATION   OF   THE   VERBS   IN   ER. 

Indicative  Mood. 


PRESENT. 


eu 


Sing.- 


Plur.- 


vendo 
vendes 
vende 

n6s  vendemos 
vendeis 
vendem 


I  sell 

thou  sellest 
he  sells 
we  sell 
you  sell 
they  sell 


PRETERIMPERFECT. 


{eu    vendia 
vendias 
vendia 

{nos  vendiamos 
vendieis 
vendido 


I  did  sell 

thou  didst  sell 
he  did  sell 
we  did  sell 
you  did  sell 
they  did  sell 


PRETERPERFECT  DEFINITE. 

{eu   vendi  I  sold 

vendeste  thou  soldest 

vendeo  he  sold 

[nos  vendemos  we  sold 

Plur.-!        vendestes  you  sold 

I       venderdo  they  sold 

PRETERPERFECT. 

[eu    tenho  vendido  I  have  sold,  &c. 

ing.  4        tens  vendido  „ 

I        tern  vendido 
nos  temos  vendido 
tendes  vendido 
teem  vendido 


Sing 


Plur.- 


VERBS. 


PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

{eu   tinha  vendido  I  had  sold,  &c. 
tinhas  vendido  „ 

tinha  vendido  „ 

fnos  tinhamos  vendido  ,, 

Plur.-j         tinheis  vendido  „ 

tinham  vendido  „ 

This   tense   may  also   be   conjugated  thus  :  vender  a, 
venderas,  vendera,  venderamos,  vendereis,  venderdo. 


FUTURE. 


C  eu  venderei 
Sing.-!         vender 'ds 
{_        venderd 
tnos  venderemos 
Plur.-!         vender  eis 
venderdo 


I  shall  or  will  sell,  &c. 


Sing. 


Imperative  Mood. 

vende  tu  sell  thou 

venda  elle  let  him  sell 

f  vendamos  n6s  let  us  sell 

Plur.4  vendei  vos  sell  ye 

i  vendao  elles  let  them  sell 

Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 
PRESENT. 


T  que   eu  venda 
Sing.-!  vendas 

{_  venda 

f  que  nos  vendamos 
Plur.-l  vendais 

vendao 


that  I  may  sell,  &c. 


74 


VERBS. 


PRETERIMPERFECT. 


que   eu   vendera,  or  vendesse 


Sing.  j. 


that  I  might  or 
could  sell,  &c. 


venderas,  or  vendesses 
vendera,  or  vendesse 
C  que  nos  venderamos,  or  vendessemos 
Plur.-l  vender 'm,  or  vendesseis 

venderdo,  or  vendessem 


eu   venderia 
Sing.-j         venderias 
venderia 
nos  venderiamos 
Plur.-l         vender  ieis 
venderiao 


SECOND  PRETEBIMP1RFECT. 

I  should  or  would  sell,  &c. 


PRETERPERFECT. 


que  eu  tenha  vendido 
Sing.-j  tenhas  vendido 

tenha  vendido 
que  nos  tenhamos  vendido 
Plur.-;  tenhais  vendido 

tenhao  vendido 


that  I  have  sold,  &c. 


PRETERPLUPERFECT. 


se 


eu  tivera,  or  tivesse  vendido 
tiveras,  or  tivesses  vendido 
tivera,  or  tivesse  vendido 

nos  tiveramos,  or  tivessemos  vendido 
tivereis,  or  tivesseis  vendido 
tiverao,  or  tivessem  vendido 


if  I  had  sold,  &c. 


VERRS.  75 

SECOND  PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

tfeu   teria  vendido    I  should  or  would  have  sold,  <fec. 

iSing.  -j         terias  vendido  „ 

teria  vendido  ,, 

f  nos  teriamos  vendido  „ 

Plur.  A          terieis  vendido  ,, 

terido  vendido  „ 

FUTURE. 

f  quando  eu  vender  when  I  shall  sell,  &c. 

;Sing.  4  vender  es  „ 

vender  „ 

(  quando  nos  vender mos  „ 

Plur.  4  vender  des  „ 

venderem  „ 

SECOND  FUTURE. 

/  quando  eu  tiver  vendido          when   I   shall   have 
J  sold,  <fec. 

f  .    •          /  •»  •     T 


m£*  \ 
V 


tiver  es  vendido 
vendido 


{quando  nos  tiver  mos  vendido  „ 

tiver  des  vendido  „ 

tiver  em  vendido  „ 


Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

vender         to  sell 

PRETERPERFECT. 

vendido         to  have  sold 


76  VERBS. 

Participles. 

PRESENT. 

que  vende         that  sells 

PRETERIT. 

masc.  vendido,  fern,  vendida    Plur.  vendidos,  vendidas,  sold 

FUTURE. 

que  ha  de  vender         that  is  to  sell 


GERUNDS. 


vendendo 
tendo  vendido 


selling 
having  sold 


SUPINE. 
para  vender         to  sell 

After  the  same  manner  as  the  verb  vender,  are  conju- 
gated all  the  other  regular  verbs  of  the  second  conjuga- 
tion ending  in  er  ;  as  the  following  : — 


Acometer,  to  attack 
Beber,  to  drink 
Comer,  to  eat 
Comprehender,  to  perceive, 

or  apprehend 
Cometer,  to  commit 
Conceder,  to  grant 
Cwrer,  to  run 
Dever,  to  owe 


Esconder,  to  hide 
Emprender,  to  undertake 
Meter,  to  put  in 
Offender,  to  offend 
Prometer,  to  promise 
Responder,  to  answer 
Repreliender,  to  reprove 
Tetner,  to  fear 
Varrer,  to  sweep,  &c. 


VERBS.  77 


THIRD  CONJUGATION  OP  THE  VERBS  ENDING  IN  IR. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

{eu  admitto  I  admit,  &c.  (nos  admittimos 

admittes  „  Plur.s         admittia 

admitte  „  admittem 


PRETERI1IPERFECT. 


eu  admittia  I  did  admit,  &c.         fnds  admittiamos 
admittias         „  Plur.-|         admittieis 

admittia  admittido 


PRETERPERFECT  DEFINITE. 


(eu  admitti     I  admitted,  &c.          [nos  admittimos 

Sing.-!       admittiste         „  Plur.-j         admittistes 

admittio  „  I        admittirdo 


PRETERPERFECT. 


This  tense  is  composed  of  the  participle  admittido  and 
the  present  indicative  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

^.         ftenho  admittido  I  have  admitted 

\tens  admittido,  &c.  thou  hast,  &c. 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

Composed  of  the  participle  admittido  and  the  imper- 
fect of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

«.  w     Ctinha  admittido  I  had  admitted 

\tinhas  admittido,  &c.  thou  hadst,  &c. 

It  may  also  be  conjugated  thus  :  admittira,  admittirast 
admittira,  admittiramos,  admittireis,  admittirdo. 


78 


{eu    admittirei 
admittirds 
admittird 
fnos  admittiremos 
Plur. -I         admittireis 
admittirdo 


VERBS. 


FUTURE. 


I  shall  or  will  admit,  &c.. 


Sing. 


Plur.- 


Imperative  Mood. 


admitte  tu 
admitta  elle 
admittdmos  nos 
admitti  vos 
admittao  ellcs 


admit  thou 
let  him  admit 
let  us  admit 
admit  ye 
let  them  admit 


Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

f  que  eu  admitta  that  I  may  admit,  &c. 

Sing.  A  adfMtfau  ,, 

admitta 

C  que  n6s  admittamos 
Plur.  -I  admittais 

admittao 


FIRST  PRETERIMPERFECT. 


60 


que  eu  admittira,  or  admittisse 

admittiras,  or  admittisses 
admittira,  or  admittisse 
que  nos  admittiramos,  or  admittissemos 
admittireis,  or  admittisseis 
admittirao,  or  admittissem 


that  I  might 
admit,  &c. 


VERBS.  79 

SECOND  PRETERIMPERFECT. 

eu   admittiria  I  should  or  would  admit,  &c. 

Sing.  -J        admittirias  „ 

admittiria  „ 

nos  admittiriamos  „ 

Plur.  -(  admittirieis  „ 

admittirido  „ 

• 

PRETERPERFECT. 

Composed  of  the  participle  admittido  and  the  present 
subjunctive  of  the  verb  ter. 

{que  eu  tenha  admittido     that  I  may  have  admitted 
tenhas      admit-  thou     mayest    have 

tido,  &c.  admitted,  &c. 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

It  is  composed  of  the  first  preterimperfect  subjunctive 
of  the  verb  ter  and  the  participle  admittido. 

Q,.         (se  eu  tivera  admittido       if  I  had  admitted 

1         tiveras  admittido,  &c.    thou  hadst  admitted,  &c. 

SECOND  PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

It  is  composed  of  the  second  preterimperfect  subjunc- 
tive of  the  verb  ter  and  the  participle  admittido. 

Q,.         feu  teria  admittido  I  should  have  admitted 

\      terias,  &c.  thou  shouldst,  &c. 

FIRST  FUTURE. 

se  eu  admittir  if  I  shall  admit,  &c. 

Sing.-[  admittir e^  ,, 

admittir  „ 


SO  VERBS. 


se  nos  admittirmos  if  we  shall  admit,  &c. 

Plur.-(  admittirdes  „ 

admittirem  „ 

SECOND  FUTURE. 

It  is  composed  of  the  first  future  subjunctive  of  the 
verb  ter  and  the  participle  admittido. 

o.         ( se  eu  tiver  admittido          if  I  shall  have  admitted 
\          tivercs,  &c.  thou'shalt,  &c. 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

admittir         to  admit 

PRETERPERFECT. 

ter  admittido         to  have  admitted 
Participles. 

PRESENT. 

que  admitte         that  admits 

PRETERIT. 

niasc.  admittido,  fern,  admittida         Plur.  admittidost 
admittidas,  admitted 

FUTURE. 

que  ha  de  admittir        that  is  to  admit 

GERUNDS. 

admittindo         admitting 
tendo  admittido         having  admitted 

SUPINES. 
para  admittir         to  admit 


VERBS.  81 

Conjugate    after    the  same    manner   the   following 
verbs : — 

Abrir,  to  open  Luzir,  to  shine 

•Conduzir,  to  conduce  Nutrir,  to  nourish 

Introduzir,  to  introduce  Reduzir,  to  reduce,  to  bring  to 

Induzir,  to  induce  Traduzir,  to  translate 

Produsir,  to  produce  Deduzir,  to  deduct,  &c. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR   VERBS    IN    AR. 

There  are,  in  each  conjugation,  some  verbs  which  do 
not  conform  to  the  common  rule,  aud  on  that  account  are 
called  irregulars. 

There  are  but  two  of  the  first  conjugation,  which  in 
some  of  their  tenses  depart  from  the  rule  of  the  verb 
dinar,  viz.,  estar  and  dar.  We  have  already  conjugated 
the  first,  and  the  second  is  conjugated  in  the  following 
manner  : — 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

I  give  .  (nos  damos     we  give 

thou  givest  JM        dais        you  give 

he  gives  [       ddo         they  give 

PRETERIMPERFECT. 

do  (  dava         I  did  give,  tfec.  (as  in  regular  verbs  of  the 
w  \  davaS)  &c.  first  conjugation). 

PRETERPERFECT  DEFINITE. 

.   f  eu  dei       I  gave  ^  (nos  demos     we  gave 

,2  -!        de'ste    thou  gavest  dtstes     you  gave 

I       deu      he  gave  ^  [        derao     they  gave 

G 


82  VERBS. 


PRETERPERFECT. 

This  tense  is  composed  of  the  participle  dado  and  the 
present  indicative  of  the  auxiliary  ter  ;  as,  tenho  dado,  £c. 
I  have  given,  &c. 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

Composed  of  the  participle  dado  and  the  imperfect  of 
the  auxiliary  verb  ter ;  as,  eu  tinha  dado,  &c.,  I  had 
given,  &c. 

FUTURE. 

&b  (eu  derei     I  shall  or  will  give,  &c.  (as  in  the  verb  amar) 
oi  \      dards,  &c. 

Imperative  Mood. 

c  f.  (demos  nos    let  us  give 

_g  A  dd  tu      give  thou  £  -  dai  vos        give  thou 

m  [de  elle    let  him  give  H  \_deem  elles    let  them  give 


Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

fque  eu  de  that  I  may  give,  e 
Sing.  -|               des  ,, 

I  de  „ 

'que  nos  demos  „ 

Plur    -I  deis  „ 

deem  „ 

PRETERIMPERFECT. 

'que  eu  dera,  or  desse          that  I  might  give, 
Sing.  -!  deras,  or  desses  ,, 

ra,  or  c?ess<?  ,, 


VERBS.  83 


(que  nos  deramos,  ordessemos     that  we  mightgivc,  «fcc. 
Plur.  -  dereis,  or  desseis  „ 

dfrao,  or  dessem  „ 


SECOND  IMPERFECT. 


.  (eu  daria  I  should  give,  &c.       .  (nos  dariamos 

fcjQ    I  ,  JH       I  . 

,g  -!       darias  „  ^  J.        daneis 

m  [_      daria  „  darido 

The  preterperfect,  preterpluperfect,  and  the  second 
preterpluperfect  are  composed  of  the  participle  dado 
and  the  auxiliary  verb  ter,  as  in  the  regular  verbs. 

FUTURE. 

(quando  eu  der  when  I  shall  give,  &c. 

Sing.  -<  deres  „ 

der  „ 

(quando  n6s  dermos  „ 

Plur.  -  derdes  „ 

der  em  „ 

SECOND  FUTURE 

is  composed  of  the  participle  dado,  &c.,  as  the  regular 
verbs. 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

dar,  to  give,  &c.,  as  in  the  regular  verbs. 


,84  VERBS. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERBS    IN    ER. 

I  begin  with  fazer,  poder,  and  saber,  because  they  occnr 
often  in  conversation. 

FAZER,  TO  DO,  or  MAKE. 
Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

.  (eufaco     I  do  .  (no'sfazemos       we  do 

fazes    thou  doest  3  -|       fazeis          you  do 

>/  i—  i  i  *^ 

faz       he  does  ^  [       fazem          they  do 

IMPERFECT. 

.  [eu  fazia     I  did.  or  did  make,  &c.         (nosfaziamos 

v  .  ti  I     ^  •  • 

fazias  ,,  fazieis 

fazido 


,, 


PRETERPERFECT    DEFINITE. 


(eufiz  I  made,  &c.  (nbs  fizemos 

Sing.  4      fizeste  ,,  Plur.  -        fizestes 

[     fez  „  i       j 


^.          J  eu  tenho  feito 

I        tens  feito,  &c. 


PRETERPERFECT, 

I  have  done,  itc. 


0.          f  eu  tinhafeito 
Smg.  .  _    J  „  . 

I       tinfias  feito,  dec. 


PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

I  had  done,  &c. 
i> 


FUTURF. 


^j,.         /  eu  farei  I  shall  do,  &c.     (according  to  the 

\      fards,  tfec.  „  regular  verbs. 


VERBS.  85 

Imperative  Mood. 

.  f  .  Cfagdmosnos  let  us  do 

.s  \faze  tu         do  thou  ,3  -I  fazei  v6s        do  you 

m  [fa^a  elle     let  him  do         "*  \fa$do  elles     let  them  do 


Optative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

eufa$a  that  I  may  do,  &c.  (according  to  the 

fagas,  ,,  regular  verbs.) 


PRETEBIMPERFECT. 

Jizera,  orjizesse  that  I  might  do,  <kc. 

Sing.  - 


fque  nos  fizeramos,  or  fizessemos 
Plur.  -  fizereis,  or  fizesseis 

fizerao,  or  faessem 


SECOND    IMPERFECT. 

Ceufaria       I  should  do,  &c.  (nbs  fariamos 

Sing.  -      f arias  „  Plur.  -        farieis 

[     faria  „  I      fariao 

FUTURE. 

{quando  eu  fizer  when  I  shall  do,  <fcc. 

fizeres  „ 


fizer 


n 


(quando  nos  fizermos  ,» 

Plur.  -i  fizer des  „ 

fizer  em  ,•> 


86  .VERBS 

SECOND    FUTURE. 

&b  /  quando  eu  tiver  feito         when  I  shall  have  done,  &c. 

j/2   I  tiver es  feito,  &c.  ,, 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

fazer         to  do 

GERUND. 

fazendo         doing,  or  in  doing. 

PARTICIPLE. 

feito         made,  or  done. 

After   the  same  manner  are  conjugated  desfazer,  to 
undo;  contrafazer,  to  counterfeit;  refazer,  to  do  again. 


PODER,     TO     BE    ABLE. 

Indicative  Mood. 


PRESENT. 


.  (eu  posso     I  can,  or  am  able       .  inos  podemos  we  can 

^ 

IMPERFECT. 


,        ,  ,  j  • 

podes     thou  canst  5  A        podeis      you  can 


pode      he  can  podem      they  can 


A 


Sing.  { 


eu  podia  I  could,  or  was  able,  &c. 

podias,  &c.  „ 


PRETERPERFECT     DEFINITE. 

',  pude       I  could  .  Cnos  pudemos  we  could 

pudeste  thou  couldst      £  -!        pudestes  you  could 

joocfe        he  could  puderao  they  could 


VERBS.  87 

PRETEKPEKFECT. 

Sing.      eu  tenho  podido,  &c.  I  have  been  able,  <fec. 

FUTURE. 

^.         f  eu  poderei  I  shall  be  able,  &c. 

I      poderds,  &c.  ,, 

There  is  no  Imperative. 

Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

{que  eu  possa  that  I  may  be  able,  <fec. 
possas  „ 

possa  „ 

fquenos  possdmos  „ 

Plur.  -  possais  „ 

possao  „ 

IMPERFECT. 

.  ( que  eu  pudera,  or  pudesse         that  I  might  be  able,  &c. 
pudevas,  or  pudesses  „ 

pudera,  or  pudesse  „ 

'que  nos  puderamos,  or  pudessemos  „ 

puder 'eis,  or  pudesseis  ,, 

),  or  pudessem  „ 


SECOND    IMPERFECT. 

rew  poderia  I  should  or  would  be  able,  <fcc. 

&'\       poderias,  &c.  „ 

FUTURE. 

fquando  eu  puder  when  I  shall  be  able,  <fec. 

Sing.  •<  puderes  „ 

puder  „ 

(quando  n6s  pudermos  „ 

Plur.  -  puder des  „ 

puderem  „ 


88  VERBS. 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

poder         to  be  able 

GERUND. 

podendo         being  able 

PARTICIPLE. 

podido        been  able 


SABER,  TO  KNOW. 
Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

.  (eu  sei       I  know  .  Cn6s  sabemos     we  know 

sabes  thou  knowest       £  -j        sabeis        you  know 
he  knows  sabem        they  know 

IMPERFECT. 

I  did  know 

Sing.  -[      sabias  thou  didst  know 

sdbia,  &c.  he  did  know,  &c. 

PRETERPERFECT    DEFINITE. 

(eu  soube         I  knew,  &c.  (n6s  soubemos 

T--j-  T>1- —  soubestes 

souberdo 


Sing.  -       soubeste  ,,  Plur.  4        soubestes 

I      sow6e  „ 


PRETERPERFECT. 

Sing,     eu  tenho  sabido,  &c.  I  have  known,  &c. 

FUTURE. 

so  /«w  saberei     I  shall  o?-  will  know,  &c.  (according  to  the 
£J  1      saberds,  &c.  „  regular  verbs) 


VERBS.  89 

Imperative  Mood. 


.    f  .  f 


saibatnosnos  let  us  know 


>-  -  sabe  tu     know  thou        2  •(  sabei  vos        know  you 

J/3  11-  OH    I 

\sat6a  e//e  let  him  know       {saibdo  elles    let  them  know 
Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

f  que  eu  saiba  that  I  may  know,  <fcc. 

Sing.-  saibas  „ 

1  sai&a 

f  5^6  nossaibamos 
Plur.4  saibais 

saibdo 


IMPERFECT. 

.  f  (/we  e?/  soubera.  or  soubesse        that  I  might  know,  <fec. 

tc 

souberas,  or  soubesses  ,, 

soubera,  or  soubesse  ,, 

</we  ?w5s  souberamos,  or  soubessemos  ,, 

soubereis,  or  soubesseis  ,, 

souberao,  or  soubessem  „ 


„ 

,, 


SECOND    IMPERFECT. 


mbena  I  should  know,  &c.        .  Twos  saberuimo* 

.  Si  .1  »     •  • 

sabenas  „  ^  -j        saberieis 

saberia  sabermo 


FUTURE. 


r  quando  eu  souber  when  I  shall  know,  <kc. 

Sing.-  souberes  „ 

souber  ,, 


90  VERBS. 

C  quando  n6s  soubermos         when  we  shall  know, 

Plur.-l  souberdes  ,, 

souberem  „ 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

saber         to  know 

GERUND. 

sabendo         knowing 

PAKTICIPLE. 

masc.  sabido,  fern,  sabida,  known 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR   VERB    TRAZER,    TO    BRING. 

Indicative  Mood. 


PRESENT. 


{eu  trago      I  bring  .  fnos  trazemos  we  bring 

trazes      thou  bringest  £  -I        trazeis      you  bring 
traz        he  brings  trazem      they  bring 

IMPERFECT. 

{eu  trazia  I  did  bring 

trazias,  &c.  thou  didst  bring,  &c.  (according  to  the 
regular  verbs) 

PRETERPERFECT    DEFINITE. 

.  (  eu  troiixe         I  brought  .  [nos  trouxemos 

V  r     I  &^      I 

trouxeste     thou  broughtest     £  -I        trouxestes 
trouxe         he  brought  trouxerao 


VERBS. 


91 


PRETERPERFECT. 

eu  ten/to  trazido  I  have  brought,  <fec. 

5) 


Sing. 

tens  trazido,  &c. 


FUTURE. 


{eu  trarei  I  shall  or  will  bring,  &c.         .  (nos  traremos 
trards  „  IMP*** 

trard 


• 


trarao 


Imperative  Mood. 

[  .  (tragamos  nos  let  us  bring 

Jj  -    traze  tu     bring  thou     £  1  trazei  vos        bring  you 
^  [  trag'a  elle  let  him  bring      \tragao  elles     let  them  bring 


Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 


PRESENT. 


(  que  eu  traga 
Sing.-  tragas 

traga 

(  que  nos  tragamos 
Plur.A  tragais 

tragdo 


that  I  may  bring,  &c. 


IMPERFECT. 


(  que  eu  trouxera,  or  trouxesse     that  I  might  bring,  &c. 
trouxeras,  or  trouxesses  ,, 

trouxera,  or  trouxesse  „ 

f  que  nos  trouxeramos,  or  trouxcssemos        „ 
trouxereis,  or  trouxesseis  „ 


trouxerao,  or  trouxessem 


VERBS. 


SECOND     IMPERFECT. 


eu  traria       I  should  brine:,  <fcc.  (nos  trariam&s 

'00  I  h 


trarias 
traria 


\ 


trarieis 
traria  o 


FUTURE. 

(  quando  eu  trouxer  when  I  shall  bring,  etc. 

Sing.j 


trouxeres 
trouxer 


f  quando  nos  trouxermos 
Plur. ' 


I 


trouxerdes 
trouxer  em 


Infinitive  Mood. 

PBZ8XXT. 

tracer         to  bring 

QEl.UND. 

trazendo         bringing 

PARTICIPLE. 

masc.  trazido,  fern,  trazida,  brought 


CONJUGATION    OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB 

Indicative  Mood. 


TO    SEE. 


eu  vejo 


Sing. 


PRESENT. 

I  see 

thou  seest 
he  sees,  &c. 


Plur. 


f  nos  vemos 

»     ' 


\ 


vxles 
veem 


93 

IMPERFECT. 

(  eit  via  I  did  see,  (fee. 

Sing.-         vias  „ 

[       via,  &c.  „ 

PRETERPERFECT     DEFINITE. 

(  eu  vi  I  saw,  <fec.  (  nds  vimos 

Sing.-         viste  „  Plur.-[          vistes 

vio  „  (.          virao 

PRETERPEHFECT. 

,-,.        feu  ten/to  visto  I  have  seen,  «fec. 

Sing.  { 

\      tens  visto,  <fcc.  ,, 


0.        f  eu  verei 
Smg.  { 

I       wnfs,  &c. 


FUTURE. 

I  shall  see,  &c. 


Imperative  Mood. 

ve  tu  see  thou 

bing. 

-AS-    .77.  Je^.    Jllm    geg 


I 


vejdmos  nos  let  us  see 


Plur.-l  vede  vos  see  you 

{  vfyao  dies  let  them  see 

Optative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

v.  (  qiie  eu  veja     that  I  may  see,  &c.      .  (  que  nos  nejdmos 
vejas  „  ,5 


„ 


IMPERFECT. 

Wra,  or  v/sse  that  I  might  see,  <fec. 
Sing.-|                vims,  or  visses  „ 

,  or  visse  „ 


94 
PlurJ 


VERBS. 

que  nos  viramos,  or  vissemos  that  we  might  see,  &c, 
vireis,  or  visseis  „ 

vissem  „ 


eu  vena 
Sing.x        verias 
veria 


SECOND     IMPERFECT. 

I  should  see,  &c. 


nos  venamos 
verieis 
vericio 


FUTURE. 

fquando  eu  vir  when  I  shall  see,  &c. 

Sing. -I  vires  „ 

I  vir  ,, 

fquando  nos  virmos  „ 

Plur. -I  virdes  „ 

(.  Wrew  „ 

Infinite  Mood. 
PRESENT. 

to  see 


GERUND. 

vendo         seeing 


PARTICIPLE. 

masc.  ri'sto,  fern,  vista,  seen. 

In  like  manner  are  conjugated  the  compounds  antever, 
prever,  and  rever. 

The  verb  prever,  to  foresee,  is  conjugated  in  the  pre- 
sent indicative  thus  : 


t  eu  prevejo 
Sing. -I        preves 


I  foresee,  &c. 


preve 


ends  prevemos 

prevcem 


Plur.  \       prevedet 


VERBS.  9  5 

CONJUGATION    OF   THE     IRREGULAR    VERB   DIZER,    TO    SAY. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

{eu  digo  I  say,  &c.  C  nos  dizemos 

dizes  „  Plur.-j         dizeis 

diz  „  I         dizem 

PRETERIMPERFECT. 

o-          (eu  dizia  I  did  sav,  &c. 

Sing.    \          .  .  J) 

I.     'dizias,  &c.  ,, 

PRETERPERFECT    DEFINITE. 

reu  disse          I  said,  &c.  ("TIOS  dessemos 

Sing.  •]       disseste  ,,  Plur.  -         dissestes 

disse  „  disserdo 

PRETERPERFECT. 

ew  <€^o  c?i«o  I  have  said,  <fec. 

<ews  ditto,  &c.  „ 

FUTURE. 

f  eu  direi  I  shall,  or  will  say,  &c. 

king.  -(  , 

I      diras,  &c.  ,? 

Imperative  Mood. 

(dizetu  saythou 

mg'   \  <%a  e//e  let  him  say 

fdigdmos  nos  let  us  say 

Plur.  \  dizei  vos  say  you 

[digdo  elles  let  them  say 


96 


VERBS. 

Optative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 


eu 


dig  as,  &c. 


IMPERFECT. 


eu  dissera,  or  dissesse        that  I  might  say,  Ac. 
Sing.   -  disser  as,  or  dissesses  ,, 

dissera,  or  dissesse  ,, 


fquenos  disser amos,  or  disse 
dissereis,  or  disseseis 
disserao,  or  dissessem 


SECOND    IMPERFECT. 


Sing.   I 


dirias,  &c. 


I  should  say,  &c. 


(qnando 
Sing.  -  disseres 


FUTURE. 
eu  disser  when  I  shall  say,  &c. 

» 
disser,  &c. 


» 


Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

cfo'zer         to  say 

GERUND. 

dizendo         saying 


PARTICIPLES. 


masc.  J^^o,  fern, 


,  said 


Observe  that  the  compounds  desdizer,  to  unsay,  and 
contradizer,  to  contradict,  are  in  all  points  conjugated 
like  dizer. 


VERBS.  97 


CONJUGATION    OF    THE   IRREGULAR   VERB    QUERER, 
TO    BE   WILLING. 

Indicative    Mood. 

PRESENT. 

(eu  quero  I  will,  or  am  willing,  <fec. 

•Sing.  J        queres  ) 


Plur.  •< 


quer 
nos  queremos 
quereis 
querem 

IMPERFECT. 


I  was  willing,  «fec. 
querias,  &c.  }J 


PRETERPERFECT    DEFINITE. 

eu   quiz  I  have  been  willing,  <fec. 

•Sing.  J        quizeste  }) 

„ 

nos  quizemos  Jy 

Plur.  -I        quizestes  yj 

quizerdo  t} 

FUTURE. 

flue™rei  I  shall  be  willing,  <kc. 

quererds,  &c.  „ 

Imperative  Mood. 

g-        fqueiras  tu  be  thou  willing 

let  him  be  willing 


98  VERBS. 

fqueirdmos  nos  let  us  be  willing 

Plur.  \  queirais  v6s  be  you  willing 

[queirdo  elles  let  them  be  willing 

Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PKESENT. 

Q,.         (que  eu  queira  that  I  may  be  willing,  <kc. 

\  queirds,  &c.  „ 


bO 

I- 


IMPERFECT. 

que  eu  quizera,  or  quizesse  that  I  were  willing 

quizeras,  or  quizesses  thou  wert  willing 

quizera,  or  quizesse  he  were  willing 

que  nos  quizeramos,  or  quizessemos         we  were  willing 

quizereis,  or  quizesseis  you  were  willing 

quizerdo,  or  quizessem  they  were  willing 


SECOND    IMPERFECT. 


Sing.j 


eu  quereria  I  would,  or  should  be  willing,  &e. 

quererias,  &c.  „ 


FUTURE. 


c-       fquando  eu  quizer  when  I  shall  be  willing,  &c. 

3'\  quizer es,  &c.  ,, 


Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

querer         to  be  willing 

GERUND. 

querendo         being  willing 

PARTICIPLE: 
querido         been  willing 


VERBS.  99 

Quer  is  sometimes  a  conjunction,  when  repeated  in  a 
sentence,  and  when  it  is  rendered  into  English  by 
whether  and  or;  as,  quer  o  tenhais  feito,  quer  ndo,  whether 
you  have  done  that  or  no.  But  when  it  is  not  repeated 
and  is  joined  to  the  particle  se,  it  is  sometimes  rendered 
into  English  by  at  least ;  as,  urn  se  quer,  one  at  least : 
and  sometimes  by  however,  when  joined  to  the  particle 
que  ;  as,  como  quer  que  seja,  however  it  be.  In  all  which 
cases,  it  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  third  person 
singular  of  the  indicative  of  the  verb  querer. 

The  verb  querer  is  sometimes  used  with  the  particle 
se  instead  of  the  verb  dever  ;  as,  as  cousas  ndo  se  qiierem 
feitas  d  pressa,  things  must  not  be  done  in  a  hurry. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR   VERB     VALE  It,    TO    BE    WORTH. 

I  shall  give  no  other  tenses  of  this  verb  than  the  pre- 
sent indicative,  the  imperative,  and  the  present  of  the 
subjunctive,  none  but  these  being  irregular. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

{eu   valho  I  am  worth,  etc. 
vales  „ 

vale  „ 

(nos  valemos  ,, 

Plur.j         valeis  „ 

I         valem  „ 

Imperative  Mood* 

(  vile  tu  be  thou  worth 

&'\  valha  elle  let  him  be  worth 


100 


VERBS. 


f  valhdmos  nos 
Plur.-j  valei  vos 

valhao  elles 


let  us  be  worth 
be  you  worth 
let  them  be  worth 


Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

que  eu  valka  that  I  may  be  worth,  &c. 

Sing.-!  valhas  ,, 

valha  „ 

que  nos  valhamos  „ 

Plur.-(  valhais  „ 

valhao  „ 


OF    THE   IRREGULAR   VERB   PERDER,    TO    LOSE. 

This  verb  changes  the  d  into  c  before  the  a  and  the 
o,  namely,  in  the  first  person  singular  of  the  present 
indicative ;  third  person  singular,  and  first  and  third 
persons  plural  of  the  imperative  ;  and  in  the  whole  of  the 
present  subjunctive.  It  is  conjugated  in  the  following 


manner  :- 


Indicative  Mood. 


Sing. 


PRESENT. 

I  lose,  <kc. 


a. 
Sing. 


perde 


perde  tu 
perca  elle 


Plur.- 


nos  perdemos 
perdeis 
perdem 


Imperative  Mood. 

lose  thou 
let  him  lose 


VERBS.  101 

f  percamos  nos  let  us  lose 

Plur.-j  perdei  v6s  lose  you 

I  percdo  elles  let  them  lose 

Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

f  que  eu  perca  that  I  may  lose,  <fce. 

Sing.-!  percas  „ 

perca,  &c.  „ 

The  compounds  of  the  verb  ter — as,  contenho,  I  con- 
tain; detenkoj  I  detain,  &c — are  conjugated  the  same  as 
ter. 

Some  verbs  of  the  conjugation  ending  in  er  are  only 
irregular  in  the  participle  passive :  as,  escrito,  from 
escrever  ;  absolto,  from  absolver. 

Those  that  have  the  j  before  o  in  the  present  indica- 
tive, change  the  j  into  g  in  all  tenses  and  persons,  in 
which  the  j  would  otherwise  meet  with  the  vowels  i  or  e  : 
as,  eleger,  to  elect;  eu  elejo,  tu  eleges,  &c.,  I  elect,  &c. 

IMPERFECT.  PRETERDEFINITE. 

elegia,  <fcc.  elegi,  elegeste,  &c.,  I  elected,  &c. 

The  verbs  ending  in  eio  in  the  present  indicative 
change  that  termination  into  ia  in  the  imperfect,  and  into 
i  in  the  preterdefinite,  and  are  so  conjugated. 

PRESENT. 

eu  leio  I  read,  &c.  C  lemox 

Sing.^j        Us  „  Plur.j   ledes 

le  „  (  leem 

IMPERFECT. 

eu  lia  I  did  read,  &c. 


f  eu  li 
°'  ^  lias, 


Sinjr, 

I     /i  no     Am 


102 


Sing.j 


VERBS. 


PRETERDEFINITE. 


eu  li 

leste, 


I  read,  &c. 


,, 


le  tu 


Sing.- 


Imperative  Mood. 

.  (  ledmos  n6s  let  us  read 
j_,  i 

read  thou        j^  -j  lede  v6s       read  you 

let  him  read   '  H  \  leao  elles     let  them  read 

Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

that  I  may  read,  &c. 

» 
lea,  &c. 


You  must  observe  that  they  lose  the  i  through  all  the 
other  moods  and  tenses.  The  verb  crer,  to  believe,  is 
•conjugated  in  the  same  manner. 


OP    THE    IRREGULAR    VERBS    IN    IR. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

I  go  .  (  n6s  vamos 

thou  goest     £  -!          ides 
he  goes  "*  I         vdo 


. 


eu  hia 
hias 


PRETERIMPERFECT. 

I  did  go,  <fec. 


„ 


we  go 
you  go 
they  go 


hiamos 
hieis 


VERBS. 


103 


PBETERPEBFECT    DEFINITE. 


.  (  eufui         I  went 


. 


( 

.    •] 


Sing. 


'.      ndsfomos     we  went 


foste      thou  wentst      J2 


/oi 


he  went 


you  went 
fdrdo     they  went 


PEETEEPERFECT. 

eu  tenho  ido  I  have  gone,  &c. 

,  &c.  ,, 


PEETEEPLUPEEFECT. 

q-       /  eu  tinha  ido  I  had  gone,  tfcc. 

'  I        tinhas,  &c.  „ 


FUTURE. 


Sing.{ 


re 


.  (vamos  n6s    let  us  go 
vai  ^         go  thou  ^  -  *^c  vos          go  ye 


Plur.j 


I  shall  or  will  go,  &c. 
„ 

Imperative  Mood. 

.  (va 

ou  ^  -|  *^c 

let  him  go  H  [mo  elles       let  them  go 


Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PEESENT. 

eu  va  that  I  may  go,  &c. 

vas  „ 

m  „ 

que,  n6s  vdmos  ,, 

,, 


vades 


„ 


FIEST   PEETEEIMPEEFECT. 

que  eu  fdra,  or  fdsse  that  I  might  go,  &c. 

Sing.J  for  as,  or  fosses  „ 

^a,  or  fosse  „ 


104  VERBS- 

{que  nosfdramos,  or  fossemos  that  we  might  go, 
fdreis,  or  fosseis  „ 

fordo,  or  fossem  ,, 

SECOND   PRETERIMPERFECT. 

Q,.       f  ew  m'a  I  should  or  would  go,  etc. 

^        &•  "l  •      •  a 

I       irtas,  tfec.  ,, 


PRETERPEBFECT. 


It  is  composed  of  the  participle  ido  and  the  present 
subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 


PRETERPLUPERFECT. 


It  is  composed  of  the  participle  ido   and   the   first 
preterimperfect  subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 


SECOND  PRETERPLUPERFECT. 


It  is  composed  of  the  participle  ido  and  the  second 
preterimperfect  subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

FUTURE. 

{quando  eu  for  when  I  shall  go,  <tc. 

fores  „ 

flr 

{quando  ndsformos 
fordes 
forem 


SECOND    FUTURE. 


^.      /  quando  eu  tiver  ido       when  I  shall  have  gone, 
3'\  tiveres,  &c.  ,, 


VERBS. 


105 


Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

ir         to  go 

GERUND. 

indo         going 

PARTICIPLE. 


ido 


gone 


.  (  eu  venho 

&JD  f 

.3  ^    ,    vens 
vem 


.  C  eu  vinha 
.fl  -j        vinhaK 
vinha 


.  eu  vim 
so  I 

fl  -(        wesfo 

veio 


<z-       feu  tenho  vindo 
Sing.  | 


F//?,  TO    COME. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

I  come,  &c. 


» 

>j 


^ 

s 


vimos 
vindes 
vem 


IMPERFECT. 

I  did 


tens  vindo,  &c. 
0.       Tew  wWi 

Slng-1  -      x          . 

I      viras,  &c. 


come,  &c.        .  T  wos  vinhamos 
£  I  .       . 

„  vinheis 

PL,  .    ,  ^ 

„  mn/iao 

PRETERDEFINITE. 

I  came,  &c.  .  f  n6s  viemos 

b 
„  ^  -(          vieste s 

,,  vierao 

PRETERIMPERFECT. 

I  have  come,  &c. 
» 

FUTURE. 

I  shall  come,  &c. 


106  VERBS. 

Imperative  Mood. 

{__.  fvenhdmos  nos  let  us  come 
vem  tu         come  thou  jE-  -  vinde  v6s         come  you 
venhaelle  let  him  come    4  [venhdo  elles    let  them  come 

Optative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

que  eu  venha,  &c. 

IMPERFECT. 

que  eu  viera,  or  viesse,  <fec. 

SECOND  IMPERFECT. 

viria,  virias,  dec. 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 
Wr         to  come 

GERUND. 

vindo         coming 

PARTICIPLE. 

vindo         come 

The  compounds  of  vir — as,  convir,  to  be  convenient ; 
sobrevir,  to  happen  unexpectedly — are  conjugated  in  the 
same  manner. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERBS    MENTIR,    TO    LIE  ;    SENTIR, 
TO  FEEL  ;    SER  VIR,  TO  SERVE  ;    FERIR,  TO  WOUND. 

The    verbs  change  the  i  of  the  first  person  singular 
of   the   present   tense,    indicative,  into   e   in    the    other 


VERBS.  107 

persons  of  the  same  tense,  as  well  as  in  the  other  tenses 
and  moods,  except  in  the  imperative  and  the  present 
subjunctive.  They  are  conjugated  thus  : 

Indicative  Mood. 

PBESENT. 

leu  minto  tu  mentes  elle  mente,  &c. 

Sing.  \  eu  sinto  tu  sentes  elle  sente,  &c. 

[eu  sirvo  tu  serves  elle  serve,  &c. 

Imperative  Mood. 

mente  tu,  minta  elle,   mintamos  nos,   menti  vos,  mintdo  elles. 
sente  tu,    sinta  elle,    sintamos  nos,    senti  vos,     sintdo  elles. 
serve  tu,    sirva  elle,    sirvamos  nos,    servi  vos,    sirvdo  elles. 

Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

(eu  minta  tu  mintas,  &c. 

Sing.  -!  eu  sinta  tu  sintas,  &c. 

{eu  sirva  tu  siruas,  &c. 

The  compounds  desmentir,  assentir,  consentir,  dissentir, 
presentir,  are  conjugated  like  mentir  and  sentir  ;  and  also 
the  verbs  afferir,  referir,  conferir,  deferir,  di/erir,  inferir. 


OF      THE      IRREGULAR     VERBS     AFFLIGIR,      TO      AFFLICT  ; 

CORRIGIR,  TO  CORRECT;  FINGIR,  TO  FEIGN; 
UNGIR,  TO  ANOINT;  COMPUNGIR,  FRIGIR, 
DIRIGIR,  TINGIR,  C1NGIR,  &c. 

These  verbs  change  the  g  of  the  infinitive  mood  into./ 
in  those  tenses  were  the  g  would  otherwise  meet  with 
the  vowel  o,  as  in  the  first  person  singular  of  the  present 
indicative,  afflijo;  or  a,  as  in  the  third  person  of  the 
imperative  in  both  numbers,  in  the  first  person  plural 
of  the  same  tense,  and  in  the  present  subjunctive. 


108  VERBS. 

OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB    SEGUIR,    TO    FOLLOW. 

This  verb  changes  the  e  of  the  infinitive  mood  into  i 
in  the  first  person  singular  of  the  present  indicative,  eu 
sigo,  I  follow  ;  in  the  present  subjunctive,  que  eu  siga, 
that  I  may  follow  ;  and  in  the  imperative  it  is  conju- 
gated thus  :  segue  tu,  siga  elle,  sigamos  nos,  segui  vox,  sigdo 
elles. 

Observe  that  the  u  is  lost  in  those  tenses  where  it 
would  otherwise  meet  with  the  vowels  o  and  a,  as  you 
see  in  the  examples  :  and  this  observation  applies  also  to 
the  verbs  distinguir,  to  distinguish  ;  extinguir,  to  extin- 
guish, &c. 

The  compounds  are  perseguir,  to  persecute  ;  conseguir, 
to  obtain ;  proseguir,  to  pursue. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB    OUVIR,    TO    HEAR. 

This  verb  changes  the  v  of  the  infinitive  mood  into  r 
in  the  first  person  singular  of  the  present  indicative,  eu 
ouc(o,  I  hear;  tu  ouves,  &c.;  in  the  present  subjunctive 
and  in  the  imperative  mood  it  is  conjugated  thus  :  ouve 
tu,  ou$a  elle,  oucamos  nos,  ouvi  v6s,  oucdo  elles,  hear 
thou,  &c. 

OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB    DORMIR,    TO    SLEEP. 

This  verb  changes  the  o  of  the  infinitive  mood  into  u 
in  the  first  person  singular  of  the  present  indicative, 
thus  :  eu  durmo,  tu  dormes,  elle  dorme,  &c.,  I  sleep,  &c. 
In  the  present  subjunctive,  que  eu  durma,  &c.,  that  I  may 
sleep ;  and  in  the  imperative  mood  it  is  conjugated 
thus  :  dorme  tu,  durma  elle,  durmamos  nos,  dormi  vos> 
durmdo  elles,  sleep  thou,  &c. 


VERBS.  109 

OF    THE    IRREGULAR   VERB    FUGIR,    TO    FLY    AWAY. 

This  verb  is  irregular  in  the  present  indicative,  and 
is  thus  conjugated :  fujo,  foges,  foge,  fugimos,  fugis,  fogem, 
I  ran  away,  <fec.  It  is  also  irregular  in  the  imperative 
mood,  where  it  is  conjugated  thus  :  foge  tu,  fuja  elle, 
fujamos  no's,  fugi  v6s,  fujao  elles.  Finally,  it  is  irregular 
in  the  present  subjunctive  ;  que  eu  ftija,  fujas,  &c. 

It  keeps  the  u  in  all  other  tenses  and  moods,  as  also 
the  g. 

The  verb  surgir,  to  arrive,  or  to  come  to  an  anchor, 
has  the  same  irregularity,  and  makes  surto  in  the 
participle  passive. 

The  verbs  subir,  cubrir,  encubrir,  descubrir,  acudir, 
bullir,  sumir,  consumir,  cuspir,  construir,  tossir,  <fec.,  have 
the  same  irregularity  in  regard  to  the  letter  u. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB    PEDIR,    TO    ASK. 

This  verb  is  irregular  in  the  first  person  singular  of 
the  present  indicative  and  subjunctive,  as  well  as  in  the 
imperative,  in  which  it  changes  the  d  into  f. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PBESENT. 

feupe^o  I  ask,  &c.  (ti6s]>eJimos 

Sing,  \tupedes  ,,  Plur.  - \v6s pedis 

\elle  pedc  „  [elles  pedem 

Imperative  Mood. 

.  (  .  I  pec(amos  n6s  let  us  ask 

.a  \  pede  tu      ask  thou  j^  \  Pedi  v6s         ask  you 

rjl  \  pe$a  elle    let  him  ask         "*  [  pecfio  elles      let  them  ask 


110  VERBS. 

Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

• 

.  (que  eu  peca     that  I  may  ask,  &c.    .  (que  n6s  pecamos 

peras  „  pecais 

w  \  PH 

pe$a  „  {  pecao 

In   like   manner   is    conjugated   the    verb   medir,   to 
measure  :  eu  me^o,  tu  medes,  &c. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB     VESTIR,    TO    DRESS. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

(eu  visto         I  dress,  &c.  (nos  vestimos 

Sing.  -       vestes  „  Plur.  -|         vestis 

1      veste  „  [        vestem 


Imperative  Mood. 

.  (  .  fvistamos  nos  let  us  dress 

bC  .  .  JH  . 

.S  "i  •****  wi     dress  thou        ^  -\  vesta  vos         dress  you 
[vista  elle  let  him  dress    '     \yistao  elles    let  them  dress 


Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

.  (que  eu  vista  that  I  may  dress,  &c.    .  (que  n6s  vistamos 
vistas  „  2  A  vistais 

s 

vista  ,,  ^  vistao 

In  all  other  tenses  and  moods  it  keeps  the  letter  e , 
and  in  like  manner  is  conjugated  the  verb  despir. 


VERBS.  Ill 

OP   THE    IRREGULAR   VERB   SORTIR,    TO    FURNISH. 

Feijoo  says  that  the  o  of  this  verb  is  to  be  changed 
into  u  in  those  tenses  where  the  t  is  followed  by  e  or  a  ; 
and  that  it  is  to  be  kept  when  the  t  is  followed  by  i ;  but 
in  the  Fabula  dos  Planetas  we  read,  surtio  effeito,  it  took 
effect ;  and  Andrade,  2.  part.  Apologet.,  we  read,  ndo 
sortirdo  effeito,  where  the  verb  sortirdo  is  in  the  same 
tense,  viz.,  in  the  preterperfect  definite;  therefore 
nothing  can  be  determined  about  the  irregularity  of 
this  verb. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB    CARPIR,    TO    WEEP. 

This  verb  is  defective,  and  is  only  used  in  those 
tenses  and  persons  where  the  p  is  followed  by  i;  as, 
earpimotj  carpis,  we  weep,  you  weep.  Preterimperfect, 
carpia,  carpias,  &c.,  I  did  weep,  &c. 


OP    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB    REPETIR,    TO    REPEAT. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

I  repeat,  &c.  (n6s  repetimos 

Sing.^       repetes  „  Plur.-l         repetis 

„  repetem 

IMPERFECT. 

repetia,  repetias,  (fee. 

PRETERPERFECT  DEFINITE. 

repeti,  repetiste,  tfec. 


112 


VERBS. 


Imperative  Mood. 


Q.       (repe 
mg>  {repi 


repete  tu      repeat  thou,  &c. 
epita  die  „ 


Plur' 


f 
"'  \ 


Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

que  eu  repita  that  I  may  repeat,  &c. 

>? 


repitas,  &c. 


IMPERFECT. 

repetira,  or  repetisse,  kc.      that  I  might  repeat,  £c. 


OP    THE    IRREGULAR   VERBS   SAHIR,    TO    GO    OUT,    AND 
CAHIR,    TO    FALL. 

• 

Indicative  Mood. 


eu  sao 
Sing.  -       sa/^s 


PRESENT. 

I  go  out,  Arc. 
„ 

,, 


Plur. 


PRETERIMPERFECT. 

sahia,  sahias,  &c. 

PRETERPERFECT     DEFINITE. 

sahi,  sahiste,  &c. 


Imperative  Mood. 


sahimos 

sa/w's 

sakem 


J 
----  to.    j  sake  tu 
[saia  elle 


l 
-j 
[saido  elles 


saiamos  n6s 
Plur.  -  sahi  vds 


VERBS.  113 

Subjunctive  Mood, 
que  eu  saia,  saias,    &c. 

This  is  the  common  way  of  writing  the  irregular 
tenses  of  the  verb  sahir,  as  well  as  those  of  the  verb 
cahir,  viz.,  eu  caio,  tu  cakes,  &c.,  I  fall,  &c.,  according  to 
Feijoo. 


OF    THE    IRREGULAR    VERB    ORDIR,    TO    WARP    IN    A 

LOOM. 

Feijoo  says  that  this  verb  changes  the  o  into  u  in 
those  persons  where  it  would  otherwise  meet  with  the 
syllables,  da,  de,  do. 


OF   THE    IRREGULAR   VERB   ADVERTIR,    TO    WARN. 

Advertir  is  irregular  in  the  following  tenses,  only  by 
changing  vir  into  ver. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

reu  advirto       I  warn,  &c.  fnos  advertimos 

Sing.  H[       advertes  „  Plur.  -         advertis 

adverte  „  i.       advertem 

Imperative  Mood. 

f  (advirtamos  no's 

Sing.  4  adverte  tu     warn  thou,  <fec.  Plur.  -I  adverti  v6s 

[advirta  elle  „  \advertao  ellcs 

I 


114  VERBS. 

Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

Iqueeuadvirta  that  I  may  warn,  &c.  p.  [<juen6sadvir  tamos 
advirtas  „  £  J  advirtais 

advirta  „  advirtao 


CONJUGATION  OF  THE  IRREGULAR  VERB  FOR,  TO  PLACE, 

OR  PUT. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

{en  ponho  I  put,  &c.  In6s  pomos 

poes  „  PlurJ        pondes 

poe  „  I 


PRETERIMPERFECT. 

{eu  punka         I  did  put,  &c.  (nos  punkamos 

punkas  „  Plur.4       punheis 

punka  „  I       punhao 

PRETERPERFECT   DEFINITE. 

r  ew  jews  I  put,  &c.  (n6s  puzemos 

Sing.-!        puzeste  „  Plur. '        puzestes 

poz  „  puzerdo 

PRETERPERFECT. 

It  is  composed  [of  the  present  indicative  of  the  auxi- 
liary verb  ter,  and  the  participle  posto. 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

Composed  of  the  participle  posto,  and  the  imperfect  of 
the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 


VERBS.  115 

FUTURE. 


(  eu  porei       I  shall  or  will  put,  &c.      .  (n6s  poremos 
pords  „  S'\       poreis 

'TT*\    I  CM     I  »v 

pord  ,,  I       pordo 

Imperative  Mood. 

r  .  (ponMmos  nos 

^-  poe  put  thou,  &c.  £  \pondev6s 

m  \  ponha  elle  „  '  \ponMo  elles 

Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

f  que  eu  ponha  that  I  may  put,  &c. 

•bmg.{  * 

I         tu  ponhas,  &c.  ,, 

FIRST  PRETERIMPERFECT. 

>Q,.      /  que  eu  puzera,  or  puzesse  that  I  might  put,  &c. 

3'\         tu  puzeras,  or  puzesses,  &c.  „ 

SECOND  PRETERIMPERFECT. 

^j.      J  eu  poria  I  should  or  would  put,  &c. 

3'\  tu  porias,  tfcc.  ,, 

PRETERPERFECT. 

It  is  composed  of  the  participle  posto,  and  the  present 
subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

Composed  of  the  participle  posto,  and  the  first  preter- 
imperfect  subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

SECOND  PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

Composed  of  the  participle  posto,  and  the  second  pro. 
terimperfect  subjunctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 


116  VERBS. 

FUTURE. 

o.       f  quando  eu  puzer  when  I  shall  put,  itc. 

'  I  tu  puzeres,  &c.  , , 

SECOND  FUTURE. 

Composed  of  the  participle  posto,  and  the  future  sub 
junctive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  ter. 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

por         to  put 

GERUND. 

pondo         putting 

PARTICIPLE    PASSIVE. 

posto         put 

After  the  same  manner  are  conjugated  the  verbs- 
derived  from  por:  as,  compor,  to  compose ;  dispdr,  to  dis- 
pose ;  propdr,  to  propose,  <fcc. 

Some  verbs  are  irregular  only  in  the  participle  passive : 
as,  aberto,  from  abrir;  escrito,  from  escrever,  &c. 


OF  NEUTEE  VEKBS. 

Neuter  verbs  are  those  which  make  a  complete  sense 
of  themselves,  and  do  not  govern  any  case  after  them, 
like  the  active  verbs :  as,  dormir,  to  sleep ;  andar,  to  go  ; 
tremer,  to  tremble,  &c.  There  are,  however,  some  neuter 
verbs  which  may  govern  an  accusative :  as,  dormir  um 
somno  prof  undo,  to  sleep  soundly ;  eu  fui  andando  meu 
caminko,  e  ndo  disse  uma  palavra,  I  went  my  way  and  said 


\  KRBS.  117 

not  a  word.  Neuter  verbs  may  also  be  defined  as  those 
which,  in  their  compound  tenses,  are  seldom  conjugated 
with  the  verb  ser,  to  be ;  as,  I  sleep,  I  tremble,  I  speak, 
^c.  We  may  indeed  say,  eu  tenho  dormido,  I  have  slept, 
eu  tenho  tremido,  I  have  trembled ;  but  not,  I  am  slept, 
<fec.  I  said  seldom,  because  sometimes  neuter  verbs  may 
be  conjugated  with  the  verb  ser;  as,  ser  bem  fallado,  to 
have  a  good  name. 

It  is  necessary  to  be  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  a 
neuter  verb,  to  avoid  mistakes  in  the  participle,  as  may 
be  seen  in  the  Syntax  of  Participles. 


OF  KECIPEOCAL  VEEBS. 

The  term  Reciprocal  is  given  to  such  verbs  as  reflect 
the  action  upon  the  agent,  and  are  conjugated  through  all 
their  tenses  with  the  conjunctive  pronouns  me,  te,  *<",  &c. 

EXAMPLE. 
Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

(eu  me  arrependo  I  repent,  (fcc. 

Sing.  -|  tu  te  arrependes  „ 

\elle  se  arrepende,  &c.  „ 

IMPERFECT. 

Sing,     eu  me  arrependia,  &c.  I  did  repent,  ttc. 

and  so  of  the  rest. 

Yet  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  conjunctive  pronouns 
me,  te,  etc.,  may  be  placed  either  before  or  after  the  verb 
in  the  indicative,  and  consequently  we  may  say,  eu  me 


118  VERBS. 

lembro,  or  eu  lembro-me,  I  remember  ;  me  lembrei,  or  lem- 
brei-me,  I  remembered,  <fec.  But  in  the  imperative  they 
should  be  placed  after  the  verb,  as  in  the  following 

EXAMPLE. 

..  f  .  [  lembremo-nos  n6» 

feo  I  ^, 

.3  ~\  lembra-te  tu    remember  thou,  &c.  £  -<  lembrai-vos  vos 


~\  emra-e   u    rememer      ou,     c.      -< 
\lembre-se  elle  ,,  *  [ 


In  which  example  you  will  observe,  also,  that  the  first 
person  plural,  which  in  the  other  verbs  is  like  the  first 
person  plural  of  the  present  subjunctive,  has  the  last  con- 
sonant, s,  cut  off  :  and  so  from  lembremos,  we  cut  off  the 
s  to  make  lembremo-nos  ;  and  from  arrependdmos,  we  make 
arre2)enddmo-nos,  &c.  In  regard  to  the  infinitive^  we  may 
say,  e  necessario  arrepender-se  dos  peccados,  it  is  necessary 
to  repent  of  sins  ;  e  necessario  lembrar-se,  it  is  necessary  to- 
remember  ;  and  not  se  arrepender,  or  se  lembrar.  In  like 
manner  we  may  say  lembrando-me,  remembering,  and  not 
me  lembrando.  But  the  present  infinitive  may  be  pre- 
ceded by  the  particle  para  (which  forms  the  Portuguese 
supine),  and  then  the  conjunctive  pronoun  may  be  placed 
either  before  or  after  it  ;  and  we  may  say^ara  lembrar-se, 
or  para  se-lembrar,  to  remember,  or  in  order  to  remember. 

In  the  subjunctive  mood,  you  must  put  the  conjunc- 
tive pronoun  before  the  present  ;  but  you  must  carefully 
observe  that  the  conjunctive  pronouns  must  be  placed 
before  it  when  preceded  by  the  particles  se,  if,  que,  that  : 
thus  we  may  say,  que  eu  me  lembrasse,  se  eu  me  lembrasse? 
that  I  might  remember,  &c.;  but  not  que  eu  lembrasse  me> 
&c.  But  -when  the  first  preterimperfect  is  not  preceded 
by  any  particle,  then  you  must  place  the  conjunctive 
pronoun  after  it  ;  as,  arrependera-me  eu  disso,  I  wish  I 
repented  it. 


VERBS.  119 

Iii  the  second  preterimperfect  we  may  place  the  con- 
junctive pronouns  either  before  or  after  it,  therefore  you 
may  say  arrependeria-me  se,  <fec.,  or  eu  me  arrependeria  set 
<fcc.,  I  should  repent  if,  <fec. 

In  the  future  you  must  always  place  the  conjunctive 
pronouns  before  it :  thus,  quando  eu  me  lembrar,  when  I 
shall  remember ;  but  not  quando  eu  lembrar-me. 

Note.  All  the  verbs  active  may  become  reciprocals. 

EXAMPLE. 

feu  me  amo  I  love  myself 

Sing.  \  tu  te  amas  thou  lovest  thyself 

\elle  se  ama  he  loves  himself 

Plur.     nos  nos  amamos,  &c.  we  love  ourselves,  &c. 


CONJUGATION    OF   THE   RECIPROCAL   VERB,    IR-SE,    TO   GO 

AWAY. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

^.    f  f  eu  me  vou  I  go  away 

3  I  tu  te  vais,  &c.  thou  goest  away,  &c. 

PRETERIMPEBFECT. 

o-       f  eu  me  la  I  did  go  away 

I  tu  te  ias,  &c.  thou  didst  go  away,  <fec. 


c.        f  eu  me  fui 
Sing,  i 

'\tute  foste, 


PRETERPERFECT   DEFINITE. 

I  went  away 
&c,  thou  wentest  away,  <fec. 


1 20  VERBS. 

PRETERPERFECT. 

^.       f  eu  me  tenho  ido  I  am  gone  away 

?  I  tu  te  tens  ido,  &c.         thou  hast  gone  away,  &c. 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

.  (  eu  me  tinha  ido  I  was  gone    away,  or  I  had 

gone  away 


tu  te  tinhas  ido,  &c.         thou  hadst  gone  away,  <fec. 
Sing. 


FUTURE. 

eu  me  irei  I  shall  or  will  go  away 

tu  te  irds,  &c.  thou  shalt  go  away,  &c. 


Imperative  Mood. 

«.       f  vai-te  go  thou  away 

3  \  va-se  let  him  go  away 

/  vamo-nos  let  us  go  away  [gone 

Plur.A  ide-vos  go  away,  get  away,  or  get  you 

1  vao-se  let  them  go  away 

Subjunctive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

^.       /  que  eu  me  vd  that  I  may  go  away 

3'\  que  tu  te  vas,  &c.      that  thou  mayest  go  away,  &c. 

FIRST   PRETERIMPERFECT. 

I  eu  me  fora,  or  me  fosse         that  I  might  go  away 

-\  j,A  j.A         o      fthat  thou  mightest  go 

I  tu  te  foras,  or  te  fosses,  &c.  -{ 


Sing.j 


I     away,  &c. 

SECOND   PRETERIMPERFECT. 

e u  me  iria  I  would  go  away 

tu  te  irias,  &c.          thou  wouldst  go  away,  &c. 


VERBS.  121 

PRETERPERFECT. 

que  eu  me  tenha  ido,  &c.      that  I  have  gone  away,  &c. 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

que  eu  me  tivera,  or  me  tivesse  ido,  <fcc.    -I 

I      away,  <fec. 

SECOND    PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

•eu  me  teria  ido,  &c.         I  should  have  gone  away,  <tc. 

FUTURE. 

quando  eu  me  for,  <fcc.         when  I  shall  go  away,  &c. 

SECOND  FUTURE. 

-quando  eu  me  tiver  ido,  (fee.  when  I  shall  have  gone  away,  <fec. 

Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 
ir-se         to  go  away 

PRETERPERFECT. 

ter-se-ido         to  have  gone  away 

Participles. 

PRESENT. 
que  se  vai         that  goes  away 

PRETERIT. 

ido         gone  away 

FUTURE. 

que  ha  de  ir-se         that  is  to  go  away 

GERUNDS. 

indo-se         going  away 
tendo-se  ido         having  gone  away 

SUPINE. 
para  ir-se         to  go,  or  in  order  to  go  away 


122  VERBS. 

Observe,  that  in  the  compound  tenses  the  pronouns^ 
me,  te,  &c.,  are  placed  before  the  auxiliary  verb. 

2ndly.  This  verb  is  also  used  in  speaking  of  vessels  to 
signify  their  being  leaky  ;  as,  vdi-se  a  cuba,  the  tub  leaks. 
It  is  also  used  before  the  gerunds :  as,  o  inverno  vai-se 
acabando,  the  winter  is  drawing  to  an  end  ;  elles  vdo-se 
preparando,  they  are  preparing  themselves :  in  which 
examples  the  verb  is  to  be  rendered  into  English  by  to  be, 
and  without  the  addition  of  the  adverb  away.  Sometimes 
it  is  placed  before  the  present  infinitive  :  as,  ir-se  deitdr,. 
to  go  to  bed. 


OF    THE    RECIPROCAL    VERB     VIR-8E,    TO    COME    AWAY. 

This  verb  is  to  be  conjugated  like  the  verb  vir;  but 
you  must  place  the  conjunctive  pronouns  me,  te,  &c.,. 
according  to  the  observations  made  above. 


OF  THE  RECIPROCAL  VERB  A  V IR-SE,  TO  AGREE. 

This  is  a  compound  verb,  which  is  to  be  conjugated 
by  putting  the  particle  a  before  the  verb  vir  in  all  its 
tenses  and  moods,  attending  to  the  observations  already 
made  concerning  the  conjunctive  pronouns,  and  also  in 
regard  to  the  reciprocal  verb  haver-se,  to  behave,  in  the 
conjugation  of  which  no  more  is  necessary  than  to  add 
the  conjunctive  pronouns  to  the  verb  haver. 


VERHs.  123- 


IMPEBSONAL  VEKBS. 

There  are  three  sorts  of  impersonal  verbs,  which  have 
only  the  third  person  singular. 

The  first  are  properly  impersonals  of  themselves  ;  as, 

succede  it  happens 

basta  it  is  enough,  or  it  suffices 

chove  it  rains 

troveja  it  thunders 

The  second  are  derived  from  the  active  verbs,  followed 
by  the  particle  se,  which  renders  them  impersonal ;  as, 
ama-se,  they  love ;  diz-se,  they  say ;  nota-se,  it  is  noted. 
They  are  also  called  passive  impersonals. 

The  third,  which  have  a  great  affinity  with  reciprocal 
verbs,  arc  conjugated  with  the  conjunctive  pronouns,  mey 
te,  Ike,  nos,  vos,  Ikes  ;  as,  doe-me,  doe-te,  doe-Hie,  &c. 

THE    IMPERSONAL   VERBS    OF    THEMSELVES    ARE  : 

convem,  it  is  convenient 

succede,  it  happens,  or  it  falls  out 

estd-me  bem,  it  becomes  me 

basta,  it  is  enough 

chovisca,  it  mizzles 

chove,  or  cake  pedra,  it  hails 

gea,  it  freezes 

neva,  it  snows 

fuzila,  or  relampeja,  it  lightens 

importa,  it  matters,  it  concerns 

parece,  it  seems 

and  the  like,  which  are  conjugated  with  the  third  person 
singular  of  each  tense  ;  as, 


124  VERBS. 

Indicative  Mood. 

PKESENT. 

chove         it  rains 

IMPERFECT. 

chovia         it  did  rain 

PRETERPERFECT    DEFINITE. 

choveo         it  rained 

PRETERPERFECT. 

tern  c/i<>t'(</<>         it  has  rained 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

tinha  chovido         it  had  rained 

FUTURE. 

choverd         it  shall  or  will  rain 

Imperative  Mood, 
chdva         let  it  rain 

Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

que  chdva         that  it  may  rain 

IMPERFECT. 

que  chovera,  or  chovesse         that  it  might  rain 

SECOND    IMPERFECT. 

ckoveria         it  should  rain 

FUTURE. 

quando  chover         when  it  shall  rain 

SECOND   FUTURE. 

quando  tiver  chovido         when  it  shall  have  rained 
Infinitive  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

chover         to  rain 


VERBS.  1 25 

The  particle  se,  which  composes  the  second  sort  of 
impersonal  verbs,  may  be  placed  either  before  or  after 
them :  as,  diz-se,  they  say ;  sabe-se,  it  is  known  ;  sabia-se, 
it  was  known  ;  logo  se  soube,  it  was  immediately  known  ; 
se  diz,  it  is  said,  (fee.,  but  sometimes  they  make  no  use  of 
the  particle  se,  and  only  puts  the  verb  in  the  third  person 
plural ;  as,  dizem,  instead  of  se  diz,  they  say. 

In  like  manner  all  the  active  verbs  may  become  im- 
personal. 

In  regard  to  these  verbs,  observe,  when  the  noun  that 
follows  them  is  in  the  singular  number,  you  must  put  the 
verb  in  the  singular ;  if  the  noun  be  in  the  plural,  you 
must  put  the  verb  in  the  plural. 

EXAMPLES. 

Louva-se  o  capitdo,  they  praise  the  captain. 

Louvao-se  os  capitdes,  they  praise  the  captains. 

Ve-se  um  homem,  they  see  a  man. 

Veem-se  homens,  they  see  men. 

When  Ihe  is  used  after  the  word  se,  then  the  must  be 
rendered  into  English  by  his  or  her ;  as,  louva-se-lhe  o 
valor,  they  praise  his  or  her  courage. 

The  third  sort  of  impersonal  verbs  are  such  as  are 
conjugated  with  the  personal  pronouns,  me,  te,  Ihe,  <fec., 
with  the  third  person  singular. 

EXAMPLES. 
Indicative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

desagrada-me  I  am  displeased,  or  it  displeases  me 

desagrada-te  thou  art  displeased 

desagrada-lhe  he  or  she  is  displeased 

desagrada-nos  we  are  displeased 

desagrada-vos  you  are  displeased 

desagrada-lhes  they  are  displeased 


126  VERBS. 

IMPERFECT. 

desagradava-me,  &c.         I  was  displeased,  <fcc. 

PRETERPERFECT    DEFINITE. 

desagradou-me,  &c.         I  was  displeased,  <fec.' 

FUTURE. 

desagradar-me-ha,  <fcc.          I  shall  be  displeased,  &c. 
Optative  Mood. 

PRESENT. 

que  me  desagrade,  &c.         that  I  may  be  displeased,  &c. 

IMPERFECT. 

que  me  desagraddra,  or)  ,,  ,.     , 

[that  I  were  displeased,  &c. 
desagradasse,  &c. 

SECOND    IMPERFECT. 

desagradar-me-hia,  &c.         I  should  be  displeased,  &c. 

Conjugate  after  the  same  manner — 

succede-me,  it  happens  to  me,  ttc. 
doe-me,  it  grieves,  or  it  pains  me,  &c. 
parece-me,  it  seems  to  me,  &c. 
he-me  preciso,  it  behoves  me,  &c. 
agrada-me,  it  pleases  me,  &c. 
lemlro-me,  I  remember,  Arc. 

Many  of  these  impersonal  verbs  have  the  third  person 
singular  and  plural ;  as, 

doe-trie  a  perna,  my  leg  pains  me 
doem-me  os  olhos,  I  have  sore  eyes 
o  vosso  vestido  parece-me  novo,  your  coat  appears  new  to  me 
os  vossos  sapatos  me  parecem  muito  compridos,  your  shoes 
seem  to  me  too  long. 


VERBS.  127 

OP   THE   VERB   SER,  TO   BE. 

The  verb  ser  is  also  used  as  an  impersonal,  as  will  be 
•seen  in  the  following  examples  :  6  tempo  de  levantar-se,  it 
is  time  to  get  up  ;  era  tempo  de  ir,  it  was  time  to  go,  &c., 
und  particularly  when  it  is  conjugated  with  the  adjectives 
preciso  or  necessario:  as,  ^  preciso,  or  necessario,  fazer  isto, 
this  must  be  done  ;  era  preciso,  or  necessario,  escrever,  it 
was  necessary  to  write  ;  eu  iria  se  fosse  preciso,  I  would 
go  if  it  should  be  necessary  ;  6  preciso  que  eu  va,  I  must 
go ;  d  preciso  que  eu  leia,  I  must  read ;  ^  preciso  que  elle 
•coma,  he  must  eat ;  seria  preciso  que  eu  fosse,  I  should  go. 
You  see  by  the  last  examples,  that  when  the  verb  ser  and 
the  adjective  are  before  the  conjunctive  mood  with  the 
particle  que,  the  conjunctive  is  rendered  in  English  by  the 
infinitive  ;  but  if  the  verb  ser  is  followed  by  the  relative 
pronoun  quern,  it  must  then  be  rendered  in  English  in  the 
following  manner  :  as,  eu  sou  quern  tern,  feito  aquillo,  it  is 
I  who  have  done  that ;  tu  e"s  quern  tern,  &c.,  it  is  thou  who 
hast,  &c.;  elle  e  quern  tern,  &c.,  it  is  he  who,  &c.;  nos  somos 
quern  temos,  <fcc.,  it  is  we  who  have,  &c.;  v6s  sols  quern 
tendes,  <kc.,  it  is  you  who  have,  &c.;  ellessao  quern  tern,  &c., 
it  is  they  who  have,  <fec.;  el  Rei  6  quern  o  manda,  it  is  the 
King  who  orders  it ;  ella  e  quern  o  ere,  it  is  she  who 
believes  it ;  elles  sdo  quern  o  fizerao  ?  is  it  they  who  have 
done  it  ?  eu  sou  quern  o  fiz,  it  was  I  who  did  it ;  entao  & 
quando  eu  tomo  as  minhas  medidas,  it  is  then  I  take  my 
measures ;  entao  e  quando  eu  vi,  it  was  then  I  saw,  or  only 
then  I  saw.  You  may  observe  that  quando,  when,  must 
be  made  use  of  in  the  last  examples,  although  it  is  not 
required  in  English. 


128  VERBS. 

OF    THE    VERB   HA  VER,   WHEN    IT    IS    IMPERSONAL. 

It  is  to  be  thus  conjugated— 

Indicative  Mood. 

PEESENT. 

ha,  or  nao  ha,  there  is  or  there  is  not,  or  there  are  or 
there  are  not. 

IMPERFECT. 

havia         there  was  or  there  were 

PRETERPERFECT   DEFINITE. 

houve         there  was  or  there  were 

PRETERPERFECT. 

tern  havido         there  has  been  or  there  have  been 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

tinha  havido         there  had  been 

FUTURE. 

haverd         there  shall  be 

Imperative  Mood, 
haja         let  there  be 

Optative  and  Subjunctive  Moods. 

PRESENT. 

que  haja         that  there  may  be 

IMPERFECT. 

que  houvera,  or  houvesse         that  there  were 

SECOND    IMPERFECT. 

haveria         there  would  be 


VERBS.  129 

PRETERPERFECT. 

<iue  tenha  havido         if  there  has  been 

PRETERPLUPERFECT. 

se  tivesse  havido         if  there  had  been 

FUTURE. 

quando  houver         when  there  will,  or  shall  be 

SECOND   FUTURE. 

quando  tiver  havido        when  there  shall  have  been 

Infinitive  Mood, 
haver        there  to  be 

PRETERIT. 

ter  havido         there  to  have  been 

GERUNDS. 

h/ivendo         there  being 
tendo  havido         there  having  been 

Those  who  learn  Portuguese  are  greatly  at  a  loss  how 
to  render  the  following  expressions,  there  is  not ;  is  there  ? 
although  there  is  nothing  more  easy.  I  have  explained 
them  at  large  in  the  following  conjugation. 

CONJUGATION  OF  THE  IMPERSONAL  VERB,  there  is,  HA,  WHEN 
IT  MARKS  THE  PLACE,  THROUGH  ALL  ITS  TENSES. 

There  is  (of  it)  ha  Id  d'isso 

There  is  not  (of  it)  nao  ha  Id  d'isso 

Is  there  (of  it  ?)  ha  Id  d'isso  ? 

Is  there  not  (of  it?)  nao  ha  Id  d'isso  ? 

There  was  (of  it)  fiavia  Id  d'isso 

There  was  not  (of  it)  nao  havia  Id  d'isso 

Was  there  (of  iff)  havia  Id  d'isso  ? 

Was  there  not  (of  it  ?)  nao  havia  Id  d'isso  '? 

K 


130  VERBS. 


There  was  (of  it) 
There  was  not  (of  it) 
Was  there  (of  it?) 
Was  there  not  (of  it  1) 

There  shall  be  (of  it) 
There  shall  not  be  (of  it) 
Shall  there  be  (of  it1?) 
Shall  there  not  be  (of  it  ?) 

That  there  may  be  (of  it) 
That  there  may  not  be  (of  it) 
That  there  were  (of  it) 

That  there  were  not  (of  it) 

There  would  be  (of  it) 
There  would  not  be  (of  it) 
Would  there  not  be  (of  it?) 

If  there  had  been  (of  it) 
If  there  had  not  been  (of  it) 


houve  Id  d'isso 
ndo  houve  Id  d'isso 
houve  Id  d'isso  ? 
ndo  houve  Id  d'isso? 

haver d  Id  d'isso 
ndo  haver  d  Id  d'isso 
haverd  Id  d'isso  ? 
ndo  haverd  Id  d'isso? 

que  haja  Id  d'isso 

que  ndo  haja  Id  d'isso 

que   houvera,    or  houvesse   Id 

d'isso 
ndo   houvera   or   houvesse   Id 

d'isso 

haver ia  Id  d'isso 
ndo  haveria  Id  d'isso 
ndo  haveria  Id  d'isso  ? 

se  tivesse  havido  Id  d'isso 
se  ndo  tivesse  havido  Id  d'isso 


There    would    have    been     teria  havido  Id  d'isso 

(of  it) 
There  would  not  have  been     ndo  teria  havido  Id  d'isso 

(of  it) 


Would    there    have  been 

(of  it  1) 
Would  there  not  have  been 

(of  it  ?) 

When  there  will  be  (of  it) 
When   there    will   not  be 
(of  it) 


teria  havido  Id  d'isso  ? 
ndo  teria  havido  Id  d'isso  ? 

quando  houver  Id  d'isso 
quando  ndo  houver  Id  d'isso 


VERBS.  131 

When  there  will  have  been  quando  tiver  havido  Id  d'isso 

(of  it) 

When  there  will  not  have  quando   ndo   tiver  havido  Id 

been  (of  it)  d'isso 

Will  there  have   been  (of  terd  havido  Id  d'isso  ? 

it?) 

Will  there  not  have  been  ndo  terd  havido  demasiado  Id 

too  much  (of  it  ?)  d'isso  ? 

Through  there  having  been  por  ter  havido  Id  demasia- 
too  much  (of  it)  damente  d'isso 

There  having  been  too  little  tendo  havido  Id  muito  pouco 
(of  it)  d'isso 

When  to  there  is  or  there  is  not,  there  are  or  there  are 
not,  there  ivas  or  were,  or  there  was  or  were  not,  &c., 
follows,  is  there  not  ?  is  there  ?  are  there  not  ?  are  there  ? 
was,  or  ivere  there  not  ?  was,  or  were  there  ?  it  is  rendered 
in  Portuguese  by  e  verdade  ?  ndo  6  verdade  ?  or,  e  assim  ? 
ndo  e  assim  ?  Examples  :  there  is  some,  is  there  not  1  ha 
Id  d'isso,  ndo  e  verdade  ?  there  was  not  any,  was  there  1 
ndo  houve  Id  d'isso,  nao  e  assim  ?  &c. 

Most  sentences  beginning  with  the  word  some  and  the 
verb  to  be  are  expressed  in  Portuguese  by  the  impersonal 
ha  :  as,  some  friends  are  false,  ha  amigos  falsos  ;  some 
Christians  are  unworthy  of  that  name,  ha  Christdos  que 
nao  sdo  dignos  de  tal  nome. 

Observe  that  ha  comes  before  a  substantive  even  of 
the  plural  number. 

The  impersonal  ha  is  besides  used  to  denote  a  quan- 
tity of  time,  space,  and  number  :  as,  ha  dez  annos  que 
morreo,  he  has  been  dead  these  ten  years,  or,  he  died  ten 
years  ago ;  ha  trinta  milhoens  d' almas  em  Franca,  there 
are  thirty  millions  of  souls  in  France  ;  de  Paris  a  Londres 
ha  120  legoas,  Paris  is  120  leagues  from  London. 


132  VERBS. 

The  question  of  space  is  asked  thus,  quanta  ha  de  Paris 
a  Londres  ?  how  far  is  Paris  from  London  1 


OF     THE     IMPERSONAL      VERB      HA-SE,     IT      IS      NECESSARY, 

or  MUST. 

This  verb  answers  to  the  Italian  bisogna  and  to  the 
French  il  faut,  and  always  requires  to  be  intercepted  with 
the  preposition  de,  thus  : — present,  ha-de-se  ;  preterite, 
havia-de-se — being  then  followed  by  the  infinitive.  It 
denotes  the  necessity  of  doing  something,  and  is  rendered 
in  English  by  must,  and  sometimes  by  the  verb  to  be, 
through  all  its  tenses,  with  the  words  necessary,  requisite, 
needful,  &c.;  and  as  it  denotes  the  necessity  of  doing 
something  in  general,  without  specifying  who  must,  there- 
fore the  agent  coming  before  must  is  anybody,  according 
to  the  subject  of  the  sentence  ;  as, 

Ha-de-se  fazer  aquillo,  one,  or  somebody,  must  do  that. 
Ha-de-se  ir,  one,  or  somebody  must  go. 

Sometimes  the  verb  coming  after  this  impersonal  is 
rendered  in  English  by  the  passive  voice  ;  as,  ha-de-se 
fazer  isto,  this  must  be  done. 

In  the  conjugation  of  this  verb,  you  must  use  the  verb 
to  be  with  the  word  necessary,  as  I  have  already  said. 

EXAMPLE. — Present,  ha-de-se,  it  is  necessary.  Imper- 
fect, havia-de-se,  it  was  necessary  ;  and  so  through  all  the 
tenses  and  moods. 

Sometimes  the  infinitive  that  follows  the  particle  de  is 
placed  between  the  impersonal  and  its  particle  se;  as,  ha- 
de-achar-se,  it  must  be  found :  and  sometimes  the  infini- 
tive precedes  the  impersonal  and  this  follows  the  particle 


VERBS. 

se  ;  as,  achar-se-ha,  it  will  be  found  :  in  this  case  you  must 
not  join  the  particle  de  to  it.  Observe  that  the  infinitive 
may  be  also  placed  between  the  imperfect  tense  of  this 
impersonal  verb  and  its  particle  se  ;  as,  havia  de  achar-se, 
it  was  to  be  found :  but  when  the  infinitive  precedes  both 
the  impersonal  and  its  particle  se,  then  you  must  put  the 
particle  se  before  the  impersonal,  and  make  use  of  the 
imperfect  hia,  and  not  havia  ;  thus  we  must  say  ac/iar-se- 
hia,  and  not  achar-se  havia. 


OF   THE    DEFECTIVE   VERBS    CARPIR,    TO    WEEP,    AND 
SOER,    TO   BE   WONT. 

The  verb  carpir  is  used  only  in  those  tenses  and  per- 
sons where  the  p  is  followed  by  an  i  ;  as,  carpimos,  carpis, 
we  weep,  you  weep.  Preterimp.  carpia,  carpias,  &c.,  I  did 
weep,  &c. 

The  verb  soer  is  only  used  in  the  third  persons  of  the 
present  indicative,  of  the  preteriinperfect  of  the  same 
mood,  and  in  the  gerund  :  as,  elle  soe,  he  is  wont ;  elles 
soem,  they  are  wont.  Imperf.  elle  sola,  he  was  wont ;  elles 
soiao,  they  were  wont.  Gerund,  soendo,  being  wont. 


134  ADVERBS. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
OF  THE  PARTICIPLES. 

THE  participle  is  a  tense  of  the  infinitive,  which  serves 
to  form  the  preterperfects  and  preterpluperfects  of  all 
the  verbs :  as,  tenha  amado,  I  have  loved ;  tinka  amado, 
I  had  loved. 

Amado  is  a  participle,  and  all  the  verbs  in  ar  form  the 
participle  in  ado  ;  as,  amado,  cantado,  &c. 

Such  participle  is  likewise  a  noun  adjective.  Examples : 
Homem  amado,  mulher  amada ;  livros  amados,  letras 
amadas. 

Some  participles  are  frequently  abridged ;  as,  envolto 
or  envolvido,  corrupto  or  corrompido,  enxuto  or  enxugado, 
and  several  others,  which  the  use  of  authors  will  point 
out  to  you. 

The  regular  verbs  ending  in  er  or  ir  form  the  parti- 
ciple in  ido  ;  as,  vendido,  recibido,  luzedo,  nutrido,  <fec. 


CHAPTER     VII. 
OF  THE  ADVERBS. 

THE  adverb  is  that  which  gives  more  or  less  force  to 
the  verb  or  the  adjective. 

The  adverb  has  the  same  effect  with  the  verb  as  the 
adjective  with  the  substantive  :  it  explains  the  accidents 
and  circumstances  of  the  action  of  the  verb. 


ADVERBS.  135 

There  are  a  great  many  sorts ;  as,  adverbs  of  time, 
place,  quantity,  &c. 

Adverbs  of  time  :  as,  at  present,  presentemente ;  now, 
agora ;  yesterday,  hontem  ;  to-day,  hoje  ;  never,  nunca  ; 
always,  sempre  ;  in  the  meantime,  entretanto. 

Adverbs  of  place  :  as,  where,  onde ;  here,  aqui ;  from 
whence,  donde  ;  there,  all ;  from  hence,  daqui ;  above, 
em  cima  ;  below,  em  baixo  ;  far,  longe ;  near,  perto. 

Adverbs  of  quantity  :  as,  how  much,  quanta ;  how 
many,  quantos,  or  quantas  ;  so  much,  tanto  ;  much,  muito; 
little,  pouco. 

A  great  many  adverbs  are  formed  from  adjectives, 
changing  o  into  amente  :  santo,  santamente,  holily ;  rico, 
ricamente,  richly ;  douto,  doutamente,  learnedly. 

From  adjectives  in  e  or  I  we  likewise  form  adverbs,  by 
adding  mente  to  them  ;  as, 

Constante,  constantemente,  constantly. 
Diligente,  diligentemente,  diligently. 
Prudente,  prudentemente,  prudently. 
Fiel,  fielmente,  faithfully. 

In  order  to  assist  the  memory  of  those  who  are  learn- 
ing the  Portuguese  language,  I  have  here  collected  a  large 
number  of  adverbs,  which,  by  frequent  repetition,  may  be 
easily  retained,  especially  those  terminating  in  mente, 

A   COLLECTION    OF   ADVERBS. 


Abundantemente,  abundantly 
Com  razao,  justamente, justly 
Absolutamente,  absolutely 
Antigamente,  anciently 
De  proposito,  purposely 
Adeus,  farewell 
Admiravelmente,  Maravilho- 


samente,  ds  mil  maravil- 
Jias,  admirably 
Astutamente,  cunningly 
Agora,  or  por  hora,  now  at 

this  time 

Jd,  para  jd,  now,  immedi- 
ately 


136 


ADVERBS. 


Com  condig&o,  upon  condi- 
tion 

De  parte,  aside 

De  travez,  askance,  askew ; 
as,  olhar  de  travez,  to  look 
askew,  or  askance 

Actualmente,  at  present 

Quasi,  pretty  near,  almost 

Entdo,  then 

Desde  entdo,  since  that  time 

Desde  quando  ?  since  when 

De  quando  ha  ?  from  what 
time?  how  long  1 

De  quando  em  quando,  now 
and  then,  ever  and  anon 

Quando  bem,  or  ainda  quan- 
do, albeit,  although  it 
should  be 

Quando  muito,  at  the  most 

Quando  menos,  at  least 

Cd,  here  or  hither 

La,  there 

Ali,  there  in  that  place 

Alii,  there,  expresses  the 
place  where  stands  the 
person  spoken  to ;  as,  alii 
onde  estas,  there  where 
you  are 

Acold,  there 

A  traipoadamente,  treach  er- 
ously 

De  maravilha,  very  seldom 

A  miudo,  often 

Assim,  so 


Tao,  so 

A'  jwessa,  in  haste 

Facilmente,  easily 

Ao  avesso,  or  ds  avessas,  the 
wrong  side  outward 

De  improviso,  or  improvisa- 
mente,  unawares 

Livremente,  freely 

Muito,  much 

Depressa,  quickly 

Aqui,  here 

Ate  aqui,  as  far  as  here,  or 
till  now,  or  hitherto 

D'aqui  em  diante,  hencefor- 
ward or  hereafter 

Bem,  well 

A'manha,  to-morrow 

A'manhd,  pela  manhd,  to- 
morrow morning 

Dej)ois  d'dmanhd,  after  to- 
morrow 

Ultimamente,  lastly 

Como,  as 

Como  ?  how  ? 

Cedo,  soon 

Tarde,  late 

Primeiro  que,  before  that 

Primeiro  que  tudo,  before  all, 
or  in  the  first  place 

Traz,  or  detraz,  behind 

Para  traz,  backward 

Isto  e,  to  wit 

Em  vez,  instead 

Tambem,  also 


ADVERBS. 


137 


Tanto  que,  so  much  so 
Logo  que,  as  soon  as 
De  pensado,  wilfully 
Acaso,  by  chance 
Fixamente,  stedfastly 
Finalmente,  finally 
Muito,  very 
Atrevida,mente,  boldly 
Felifemente,  happily 
Vergonhosamente,  shamefully 
Nunca,  never 
Nunca  mais,  never  since 
Logo,  immediately 
Ainda,   yet ;  as,  ainda  ndo 

veio,  he  has  not  come  yet 
Ainda,  even  ;  as,  seria  ver- 

gonha  ainda  foliar  d'isso, 

it  were  a  shame  even  to 

speak  of  it 
Nem  se  quer,  even 
Vilmente,  basely 
Fora,  abroad,  out 
Jd,  already 
D'um  salto,  at  one  jump 


De  quando  em  quando,  from 

time  to  time 
Antes,  before 
Depois,  afterwards 
Juntamente,  together 
Inteiramente,  entirely 
Ao  redor,or  em  torno,  about 
De  balde,  in  vain 
Loucamente,  madly 
Mai,  ill 
Mais,  more 
Menos,  less 
Ate',  until,  or  even 
Sim,  yes 
Ndo,  no,  not 
Onde,  where 
De  cor,  by  heart 
A's  vezes,    sometimes,  from 

time  to  time 
Quando,  when 
Nada,  nothing 
Verdadeiramente,  truly 
Dentro,  within 
Devagar,  softly 


138  PREPOSITIONS. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
OF  THE  PROPOSITIONS. 

PREPOSITIONS  are  indeclinable,  and  most  commonly  set 
before  a  noun,  a  pronoun,  or  verb. 

Every  preposition  requires  some  case  after  it,  as  you 
will  see  in  the  following  collection  :— 

GENITIVE. 

Antes  do  diet,  before  daybreak 

Diante  de  Deus,  before  God 

Dentro  da  igreja,  within  the  church 

Detraz  do  palacio,  behind  the  palace 

Debaixo  da  mesa,  under  the  table 

Em  cima  da  mesa,  upon  the  table 

Alem,  besides 

Alem  dos  mares,  on  that  side  of  the  seas 

Alem  d'isso,  besides  that,  moreover 

Alem  de  que,  idem 

A'quem,  or  d' a? quern  dos  mares,  on  this  side  of  the  seas 

Ao  redor,  or  em  contorno  da  cidade,  round  about  the  city 

Perto  de  Londres,  near  London 

A'cerca  d'aquelle  negocio,  concerning  that  affair 

F6ra  da  casa,  out  of  the  house 

F6ra  de  perigo,  out  of  danger 

F6ra  de  si,  out  of  one's  wits 

Note.  This  preposition  governs  also  a  nominative  ;  as, 
f6ra  sen  irmao,  except  his  brother,  or  his  brother  excepted. 

De  fronte  da  minha  casa,  over  against  my  house 
Defronte  da  igreja,  facing  the  church 
Depois  da  cea,  after  supper 


CONJUNCTIONS.  139 

DATIVE. 

Quanta  dquillo,  with  respect  to  that 
Pegado  d  muralha,  close  to  the  wall 
Desde  o  bico  do  pe"  ate'  d  cabe^a,  from  top  to  toe 

ACCUSATIVE. 

Per  ante  ojuiz,  before  the  judge 

Entre,  between,  among,  or  amongst 

Entre  os  homens,  among  men 

Sobre  a  mesa,  upon  the  table 

Conforme,  or  segundo  a  lei,  according  to  the  law 

Por  amor  de  Deus,  for  God's  sake 

Pelo  mundo,  through  the  world 

Pela  rua,  through  the  streets 

Pellas  terras,  through  the  lands 

Por  grande  que  seja,  let  it  be  ever  so  great 

Contra  elles,  against  them 

Durante,  during;  as,  durante  o  inverno,  during  the  winter 

We  shall  be  more  particular  about  prepositions  when 
we  examine  their  construction. 


CHAPTER  IX. 
OF  THE  CONJUNCTIONS. 

A  CONJUNCTION  is  an  indeclinable  part  of  speech  which 
serves  to  join  the  members  and  parts  of  speech  together, 
in  showing  the  dependency  of  relation  and  coherency 
between  the  words  and  sentences. 


140  CONJUNCTIONS. 

Some  conjunctions  are  copulative,  which  join,  and,  as 
it  were,  couple  two  terms  together ;  as,  Portuguezes  e 
Inglezes,  Portuguese  and  English. 

Some  are  disjunctive,  which  show  separation  or  divi- 
sion :  as,  nem,  nor,  neither ;  ou,  either,  or.  Examples : 
nem  este,  nem  aquelle,  neither  this  nor  that;  ou  este,  ou 
aquelle,  either  this  or  that ;  nem  mais,  nem  menos,  neither 
more  nor  less ;  quer  o  fa^a,  quer  ndo,  tudo  para  mim  e  o- 
mesmo,  it  is  all  one  to  me  whether  he  does  it  or  no  ;  quer 
seja  verdade,  quer  ndo,  whether  it  be  true  or  not ;  nem  se 
quer  urn,  not  even  one. 

The  adversative  denote  restriction  or  contrariety  :  as, 
mas,  or  porem,  but ;  comtudo,  yet,  however ;  mas  antes,  or 
pelo  contrario,  nay. 

The  conditional  conjunctions  suppose  a  condition,  and 
serve  to  restrain  and  limit  what  has  just  been  said  :  as, 
se,  if ;  com  condiqao  que,  dado  o  caso  que,  provided  that,  or 
upon  condition  that,  or  in  case  that,  <fcc. 

The  concessive,  which  show  the  assent  we  give  to  a 
thing  :  as,  embora,  or  seja  embora,  well  and  good  ;  estd 
feito,  done,  agreed. 

The  casual  show  the  reason  of  something  ;  as,  porque, 
what  for,  or  because,  or  why. 

The  concluding  denote  a  consequence  drawn  from 
what  is  before ;  as,  logo,  or  por  consequenda,  therefore, 
then,  or  consequently. 

The  transitive,  which  serve  to  pass  from  one  sentence 
to  another :  as,  diem  disso,  moreover,  or  besides  that ; 
sobretudo,  or  em  summa,  after  all,  upon  the  whole,  in 
the  main  a  proposito,  now  I  think  of  it,  or  by  the 

by. 

There  are  others  of  a  different  sort :  as,  se  quer,  or  ao 
menos,  at  least ;  ainda  que,  although  ;  de  sorte  que,  so  that; 
antes  quero  pedir  que  furtar,  I  will  rather  beg  than  steal  ; 


IXTERJECT1VE    PARTICLES.  141 

antes  morrerei  que,  dizer-vol-o,  I  will  rather  die  than  tell 
you  ;  jd  que,  since,  &c. 

To  the  above-mentioned  parts  of  speech,  grammarians 
have  added  Interjections,  which  are  particles  serving  to 
denote  some  passion  or  emotion  of  the  mind  :  but  there  is 
another  sort,  which  may  be  called  demonstrative ;  as,  cd 
and  Id,  and  aqui  and  ali.  Examples :  este  komem  aquiy 
this  man  here ;  aquella  mulher  Id,  that  woman  there,  &c.: 
and  some  others  continuative,  because  they  denote  con- 
tinuation in  the  speech ;  as,  com  ejfeito,  in  effect ;  diem 
disso,  besides;  ora  vejdmos,  now  let  us  see;  finalmente 
fomo-nos  embora,  and  so  we  went  away.  To  which  we  may 
.add  those  invented  to  imitate  the  sound  of  dumb 
•creatures,  and  the  noise  which  is  occasioned  by  the  clash- 
ing of  bodies  against  one  another ;  as,  zaz,  traz,  &c. 

INTERACTIVE  PABTICLES. 

OP  JOY. 

Ha,  ha,  ha  !  Ha,  ha,  ha  ! 
Oh  que  prazer  !  Oh  joy ! 

OF   GRIEF. 

Ay  !  Alas  !  ah  ! 

Ay  de  mim  I  Poor  me  ! 

Men  Deus  /  My  God  ! 

OF  PAIN. 

Ay  I  Ay ! 
Oh!    Oh! 

TO  ENCOURAGE. 

Animo  /  Courage ! 

Ora  vamos  !      Come,  come  on ! 


142  INTERJECT1VE  PAETICLES. 

TO   CALL. 

Oh  I  oh  Id!  Ho!  hey!  hip! 

OF  ADMIRATION   OB   SURPRISE. 

Oh,  oh  Id,  alii  !  Oh  my  !  Oh  dear  me  ! 
Apre!  Heyday  ! 

OF  AVERSION. 

Irra  f  Away ! 

Nada  !  Away  with  !  By  no  means  ! 

Fora  I  Fie ! 

FOR  MAKING  PEOPLE  GO  OUT  OF  THE  WAY,  OR  STAND  AWAY. 

Guardem-se  or  arredem-se  !  Out  of  the  way,  or  stand  away ! 

FOR    SHOUTING. 

Viva  !     Hurrah ! 

OF   SILENCE. 

Caluda  or  Calai-vos  /     Hush  !  Silence  ! 

OF   CURSING  AND   THREATENING. 

Maldito  sejais  /     May  you  be  cursed  ! 

FOR  DERISION. 

Ah  /    Ah  !  oh  !  oh  !  oh  ! 

OF  WISHING. 

Oh  prouvera  a  Deus  /     Would  to  God  ! 
Oxald  !     Oh  that ! 
Oh  se  !     Would  ! 

The  interjection  Oh !  serves  for  different  emotions  of 
the  mind,  as  admiration,  grief,  wish,  &c.,  and  sometimes  is 
used  ironically,  but  differently  uttered,  according  to  the 
emotion  which  it  expresses. 


ABBREVIATIONS. 


143 


SOME  ABBKEVIATIONS  USED  IN  THE  POKTUGUESE 
LANGUAGE. 


Ant° 
Sebm 

"Dmo  pe 

Capm 
Compa 
Corr° 
D.  or  Da 
Dr,  Dor 
D°  Da 
Exmo,  Exma 
V.  Exa 
V.  Sa 
V.  A. 

V.  M.  or  Vce 
V.  P. 
V.  Md' 
S. 
Franco 

Gde 

Snr.  Snra 
Revmo 

pa 

Qdo 
Qm 
Qto 

Suppe 

Gen1 
Tente 

V.  G. 


Antonio 

Sebastiam 

Beatissimo  Pde 

Capitdo 

Companhia 

Correio 

Dom  or  Dona 

Doutor 

Ditto,  ditto, 

Excellentissimo,  ma 

Vossa  excellenda 

Vossa  senhoria 

Vossa  alteza 

Vossa  merce 

Vossa  paternida.de 

Vossa  Magestade 

Santo 

Francisco 

Guarde 

Senhor,  ora 

Reverendissimo 

Para 

Quando 

Quern 

Quanta 

Supplicante 

General 

Tenente 

Verbi  gratia 


Anthony 

Sebastian 

The  most  blessed  Father 

Captain 

Company 

Post 

Don  or  Dona 

Doctor 

Said 

Most  excellent 

Your  Excellency 

Your  Lordship 

Your  Highness 

You 

Your  Paternity 

Your  Majesty 

Saint 

Francis 

Save 

Sir,  Lady 

Most  Reverend 

For 

When 

Who 

How  much 

Petitioner 

General 

Lieutenant 

For  example 


And  many  others  that  must  be  learned  by  use. 


145 


PART   II. 

CHAPTER    I. 
OF  THE  DIVISION  OF  SYNTAX. 

SYNTAX  is  a  Greek  word,  by  the  Latins  called  construc- 
tion ;  it  treats  of  the  agreement  and  construction  of  words 
in  a  sentence.  It  is  divided  into  three  sorts  :  the  first, 
of  Order  or  Arrangement ;  the  second  of  Concordance ; 
the  third  of  Government.  The  Syntax  of  Order  or 
Arrangement  is  the  proper  placing  of  words  in  a  sentence. 
The  Syntax  of  Concordance  is  when  the  parts  of  speech 
agree  with  one  another,  as  the  substantive  with  the 
adjective,  or  the  nominative  with  the  verb.  The  Syntax 
of  Government  is  when  one  part  of  speech  governs 
another. 

For  the  sake  of  those  who,  perhaps,  have  not  a  gram- 
matical knowledge  of  their  own  language,  I  shall  lay 
down  some  general  rules  for  the  Portuguese  construc- 
tion. 

I. — OF   THE   ORDER   OF   WORDS. 

1.  The  nominative  denotes  the  subject,  and  is  usually 
placed  before  the  verb  or  attribute ;  it  may  be  either  a 
noun  or  pronoun  :  as,  Francisco  escreve,  Francis  writes  ; 
eufallo,  I  speak. 

2.  When  the  action  of  the  verb  is  attributed  to  many 
persons  or  things,  these  all  belong  to  the  nominative, 

L 


146  SYNTAX. 

and  are  placed  before  the  verb  together  with  their 
conjunction  :  as,  Pedro  e  Paulo  lem,  Peter  and  Paul 
read. 

3.  The  adjectives  belonging  to  the  nominative  sub- 
stantive, to  which  the  action  of  the  verb  is  attributed, 
are  put  after  the  substantive  and  before  the  verb  :   as, 
os  estudantes  morigerados  e  diliyentes  estudao,  the  obedient 
and  diligent  scholars  study. 

4.  If   the   nominative  has  an   article,  this  article  is 
always  placed  before  it. 

5.  Sometimes  an  infinitive  is    put  for  a   noun,  and 
stands  for  a  nominative ;  as,  o  dormir  faz  bem,  sleeping- 
does  one  good :  and  sometimes  a  verb  with  its  case ;  as, 
<?  acto  de  humanidade  ter  compaixdo  dos  afflictos,  to  have 
compassion  on  the  afflicted  is  an  act  of  humanity. 

6.  The  nominative  is  sometimes  understood ;  as  amo, 
where  eu  is  understood :  and  so  of  the  other  persons  of 
the  verb. 

7.  After  the  nominative  comes  the  verb  ;  and  if  there 
is  an  adverb,   it  is  to  be    placed  immediately  after  the 
verb  whose  accident  and  circumstances  it  explains  :  as, 
Pedro  ama  com  extremo  a  gloria,  Peter  is  extremely  fond 
of  glory. 

8.  The  cases  governed  by  the  verb  are  put  after  it ; 
they  may  be  one,  or  many,  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  action  :  as,  eu  amo  a  Pedro,  I  love  Peter ;  fa$o  pre- 
sente  de  um  livro  a  Paulo,  I  make  a  present  of  a  book  to 
Paul. 

9.  The  preposition  is  always  placed  before  the  case  it 
governs ;  as,  perto  de  casa,  near  the  house. 

10.  The  relative  is  always  placed  after  the  antecedent; 
as,  Pedro  o  gual  estuda,  Peter  who  studies. 


SYNTAX.  147 


II. — OP   CONCORDANCE. 

1.  The    adjectives  agree  with  their   substantives    in 
gender,    number,    and    case  :   as,  urn  homem  virtuoso,  a 
virtuous  man ;  uma   bella  mulJier,  a  handsome  woman ; 
sumptuosos  palacios,  &c.,  sumptuous  palaces,  &c. 

2.  When   two    or   more   substantives   singular  come 
together,  the  adjectives  belonging  to  them  must  be  put 
in  the  plural ;  as,  tanto  el  rei  como  a  rainha  montados  a 
vavallo  parecem  bem,  both  the  king  and  the  queen  look 
well  when  they  ride. 

3.  If  the  substantives  happen  to  be  one  in  the  sin- 
gular and  the  other  in  the  plural,  or  to  be  of  different 
genders,  the  adjective  common  to  both  agrees  in  number 
and  gender  with  the  last :  as,  elle  tinha  os  olhos  e  a  loca 
<tberta,*  or  elle  tinha  a  boca  e  os  olhos  abertos,  his  eyes  and 
mouth  were  opened ;  as  lagdas  e  rios  estavdo  congeladosy 
the  ponds  and  rivers  were  frozen. 

4.  But  when  there  is  one  or  many  words  between  the 
last  noun  and  the  adjective,  that  adjective  (common  to 
all)  agrees  with   the   masculine   noun,  though  the   last 
noun  be  feminine  ;  and  if  the  nouns  are  in  the  singular, 
then   the   adjective  must   be  put  in  the  plural  number 
and  masculine- gender  :  as,  o  rio  e  a  lagoa  estavdo  conyela- 
dos,  the  pond  and  river  were  frozen ;  o  trabalho,  a  indus- 
tria,  e  a  fortuna   unidos,   pains,    industry,    and   fortune 
joined  together. 

5.  Every  personal   verb  agrees  with  its  nominative, 
expressed  or  understood  in  number  and  person. 

*  Use  has  made  it  allowable  that  the  adjective  common  to 
both  substantives  of  different  genders  or  numbers  may  agree  only 
with  the  last ;  but  the  best  grammar  and  practice  is  to  put,  in  such 
instances,  the  adjective  in  its  masculine  plural,  the  same  as  directed 
in  the  4th  rule. 


148  SYNTAX. 

6.  The  relative  qual  with  the  article  agrees  entirely 
with    the    antecedent ;    but    without    the   article    and 
denoting    an    absolute    quality,    it    agrees    with    what 
follows :  as,  aquelle  cora$do  o  qual,  &c.,  that  heart  which, 
&c.;  considerando  quaes  serdo  as  condiqdens,  &c.,  considering 
which  would  be  the  conditions,  &c. 

7.  Questions  and  answers  always  agree  in  everything; 
as,  a  que  servi^o  pertence  vmce  ?  elle  respondeo,  pertenco  ao 
da  rainha,  at  whose   service  are  you,  sir1?  he  answered,  I 
am  at  the  queen's  service. 

III. ON  THE  DEPENDENCE  OF  THE  PARTS  OF  SPEECH  ON 

ONE  ANOTHER. 

1.  The  nominative  being  the  basis  of   the  sentence, 
the  verb  depends  on  it,  as  the  other  cases  depend  on  the 
verb.     The  adjective  depends  on  the  substantive  to  which 
it  refers  ;  and  the  adverb  on  the  verb  whose  accidents  it 
explains. 

2.  The  genitive  depends  upon  a  substantive,  expressed 
or  understood,  by  which  it  is  governed. 

3.  The    accusative  depends    either  on  an  accusative 
verb,  or  on  a  preposition. 

4.  The  ablative  depends  on  a  preposition  by  which  it 
is  governed ;  as,  par  to  de  Roma,  I  go  from  &ome. 

5.  The  dative  and  vocative  have,  strictly  speaking,  no 
dependence  on  the  other  parts  :  the  dative  is  common,  as 
it  were,  to  all  nouns  and  verbs  ;  the  vocative  only  points 
out  the  person  to  whom  you  speak. 

I  now  come  to  the  Construction  of  the  several  parts  of 
speech. 


SYNTAX    OF    ARTICLES.  149 


CHAPTER  II. 
OF  THE  SYNTAX  OF  ARTICLES. 

BEFORE  we  come  to  the  syntax  of  the  articles,  remem- 
ber that  o,  a,  os,  as,  are  articles  only  when  they  precede 
the  nouns  or  pronouns,  but  not  when  joined  to  the  verbs. 

Those  who  understand  Latin  will  quickly  perceive  the 
difference,  if  they  take  notice  that  every  time  they  render 
o,  a,  by  ilium,  illam,  illud ;  or  by  eum,  earn,  id  ;  and  os, 
as,  by  illos,  illas,  ilia  ;  or  by  eos,  eas,  ea,  they  are  relative 
pronouns. 

1.  The  article  is  used  before  the   names   of   things 
which  can  be  spoken  of ;  therefore  nouns  of  substances, 
arts,  sciences,  plays,  metals,  virtues,  and  vices,  having  no 
article  before   them   in  English,  require   the   article   in 
Portuguese ;  as, 

0  oiro  e  a  prata  ndo  podem  fazer  feliz  ao  homem,  gold 
and  silver  cannot  make  the  happiness  of  man. 

A  virtude  ndo  e  compativel  com  o  vicio,  virtue  cannot 
agree  with  vice. 

A  philosophia  e  uma  sciencia  muito  noire,  philosophy 
is  a  very  noble  science. 

Joguemos  as  cartas,  let  us  play  at  cards. 

2.  The  article  is  not  placed  before  a  substantive  which 
is  followed  by  the  adjective  of  number  that  stands  for  a 
surname ;  as,  Joseph  Primeiro,  Joseph  the  First. 

3.  When  a  book,  or  some  part  of  it,  as  chapter,  page, 
•tfec.,  is  quoted,  the  adjective  of  number  may  come  either 
before  or  after  the  substantive  :  but  if  it  comes  after,  the 
two  words  are  construed  without  the  article  ;  as,  livro 


150  SYNTAX    OF    ARTICLES. 

primeiro,  capitulo  segundo,  &c.,  book  I.,  chapter  n.  If  the- 
adjective  of  number  comes  before  the  substantive,  it  takes, 
the  article  ;  as,  o  primeiro  livro,  the  first  book. 

4.  0  placed  before  que  signifies  what  or  which  ;  as,  fa$a 

0  que  quizer,  let  him  do  what  he  likes ;  o  que  eu  fiz,  which 

1  did. 

5.  The  article  is  never  made  use  of  before   proper 
names  of  men,  women,  gods,  goddesses,  saints. 

6.  The  article  is  not  used  in  Portuguese  before  the 
possessive  relative  pronouns ;  as,  de  quern  e  esta  casa  ?  e 
minha,  e  tua,  &c.,  whose  house  is  this  1  it  is  mine,  it  is 
thine,  &c. 

7.  When  a  mount,  mountain,  or  hill's  name  is  preceded 
by  the  word  monte,  it  takes  neither  article  nor  preposition  ; 
as,  o  Monte  Atlante,  Mount  Atlas  ;  o.s  Monies  Pireneos,  the 
Pyrenees  :  but  after  the  word  serra,  a  ridge  of  hills,  it 
takes  the  article ;  as,  a  Serra  da  Estrella,  Mount  Estrella  ; 
a  Serra  do  Potosi,  Mount  Potosi ;  however,  they  say  also, 
Serra  Lioa.* 

8.  The  noun  of  measure,  weight,  and  the  number  of 
the  things  that  have  been  bought,  requires  the  article ; 
as,  o  trigo  vende-se  a  tanto  o  alqueire,  wheat  is  sold  so  much 
a-peck. 

A  manteiga  vende-se  a  tanto  o  arratel,  butter  costs  so 
much  a-pound. 

Os  ovos  vendem-se  a  tanto  a  duzia,  eggs  are  sold  so  much 
-dozen. 

9.  No  article  is  used  with  proper  names  of  persons 
and  planets,  except  a  terra,  the  earth ;  o  sol,  the  sun ;  a 
lua,  the  moon. 

11  When  Serra  Lioa  is  used  without  the  article,  it  is  because  it 
then  expresses  the  district  or  territory  where  that  ridge  of  mountains 
is  situate ;  but,  speaking  of  the  ridge  or  mountain  itself,  a  Portu- 
gu  se  would  say,  a  Serra  Lioa,  with  the  article. 


SYNTAX    OF    ARTICLES.  151 

10.  When  proper  names  are   used  in  a  determinate 
sense,  that  is,  when  they  are  applied  to  particular  objects,, 
then  they  take  the  article  :  o  Deus  dos  Christdos,  the  God 
of  Christians  ;  o  Archimedes  de  Inglaterra,  the  Archimedes 
of  England.     The  proper  names  of  renowned  poets  and 
painters  keep  also  the  article ;  as,  o  Camoens,  o  Poj)e,  o 
Tasso,  o  Ticiano,  &c. 

11.  The  preposition  de  is  used  before  nouns  following 
one  of  these,  sorte,  especie,  genero,  and  any  other  noun  of 
which  they  express  the  kind,  character,  quality,  and  nature^ 
which  sort  of  nouns  are  usually  rendered  into  English  by 
an   adjective,  or   even   by  the   substantive   itself  placed 
adjectively,  and  making  together,  as  it  were,  but  a  com- 
pound word  :  as,  Dor  de  cabepa,  the  headache  ;  uma  sorte 
de  terra,  a  sort  of  land  ;  fallar  de  ignorante,  an  ignorant 
speech. 

Sometimes  the  English  adjective  may  be  made  an 
adjective  in  Portuguese,  as  in  the  last  example,  urn  fallar 
ignorante,  an  ignorant  speech  ;  but  not  unfrequently  the 
Portuguese  express  the  English  adjective  by  a  substantive 
of  the  same  signification  with  de  before  the  other  noun, 
though  they  have  an  adjective  of  the  same  nature  as  the 
English ;  as,  o  diabo  da  perseguicfio,  the  devilish  persecu- 
tion :  and  sometimes  the  adjective  is  used  by  them  sub- 
stantively,  or  the  substantive  is  understood ;  o  preguic^so- 
de  meufilho,  my  lazy  son ;  a  velha  de  sua  mai,  his  or  her 
old  mother.  Finally  they  also  make  use  of  the  definite 
article :  as,  o  monstro  do  homem,  or  da  mulher,  the  mon- 
strous man,  or  women ;  a  pobre  da  rapariga,  the  poor 
girl,  &c. 

12.  Nouns  are  used  without  an  article  in  the  follow- 
ing cases  : — 

1st.  In  the  title  of  a  performance,  and  in  the  middle 
of  sentences,  where  they  characterise  in  a  peculiar  manner 


152  SYNTAX    OP   ARTICLES. 

the  person  or  thing  spoken  of,  in  which  case  the  English 
use  the  particle  a  ;  as, 

Discurso  sobre  as  obrigaqoens  da  religido  natural,  a  dis- 
course concerning  the  obligations  of  natural  religion. 

Primeira  parte,  the  first  part. 

0  Conde  de  Clermont,  principe  do  Sangue,  morreo,  &c., 
the  Count  of  Clermont,  a  prince  of  the  blood,  died,  &c. 

0  S10  Antonio,  navio  de  noventa  pec(as,  the  St.  Anthony, 
a  ninety-gun  ship. 

2ndly.  In  sentences  of  exclamation  :  as, 

As  mais  bellas  florcs  sdo  as  que  menos  durdo  ;  qualquer 
ckuva  as  desmaia,  o  vento  as  murcka,  o  sol  as  queima,  e 
acaba  de  secar  ;  semfallar  d'uma  infinidade  de  insectos  que 
as  perseguem  e  deitdo  aperder:  natural  e  verdadeira  imagem 
da  bellezaf  the  most  beautiful  flowers  last  but  a  very 
short  time ;  the  least  rain  tarnishes  them,  the  wind 
withers  them,  the  sun  scorches  them,  and  completes  the 
drying  of  them  up  ;  without  mentioning  an  infinite  num- 
ber of  insects  that  spoil  and  hurt  them :  a  natural  and 
true  image  of  beauty  ! 

Srdly.  When  nouns  of  number  are  used  in  an 
indefinite  sense ;  as,  mil  soldados  de  a  cavallo  contra  cem 
infantes,  a  thousand  horse  against  a  hundred  foot. 

Tenho  lido  dous  poetas,  I  have  read  two  poets,  that  is, 
any  two  out  of  all  that  ever  existed. 

But  before  a  noun  of  number,  in  a  definite  sense,  it 
would  take  an  article  ;  as, 

Tenho  lido  os  dous  poetas,  I  have  read  both  poets ; 
because  this  plainly  indicates  a  definite  two,  of  whom 
some  mention  has  been  already  made. 

Os  cem  infantes  que  combateram  contra  os  mil  de  a 
cavallo,  que,  &c.,  the  hundred  foot  that  fought  with  the 
thousand  horse  that,  &c. 

4thly.  After  the  verb  ser,  when  it  signifies  to  become, 


SYNTAX   OF   ARTICLES.  153 

and  after  ser  tornado  por,  to  be  accounted  ;  2}assar  Por)  to 
pass  for  :  as,  elle  serd  doutor  com  o  tempo,  he  will  become  a 
doctor  in  time  ;  elle  passa  por  marinheiro,  he  passes  for  a 
sailor. 

When  the  adjective  is  used  substantively,  it  must 
have  the  neuter  article  o  before  it : 

0  verde  ofende  menos  a  vista  que  o  vermelho,  green 
hurts  the  eye  less  than  red. 

There  are  also  some  adverbs  preceded  by  the  neuter 
article  o ;  as  the  following :  o  melhor  que  eu  puder,  the 
best  I  could ;  o  menos  que  for  possivel,  the  least  possible. 

Articles  are  repeated  in  Portuguese  before  as  many 
nouns  (requiring  the  article)  as  there  are  in  the  sentence ; 
as, 

0  ouro,  a  prata,  a  saude,  as  honras,  e  os  deleites  ntio 
pod  em  fazer  feliz  ao  homem  que  ndo  tern  sciencia  nem  virtude, 
gold,  silver,  health,  honours,  and  pleasures,  cannot  make 
a  happy  man  without  wisdom  and  virtue. 

The  article  o  is  put  before  the  word  senhor,  sir,  or  my 
lord ;  as, 

0  senhor  duque,  my  lord  duke  ;  o  senhor  presidente,  my 
lord  the  president ;  os  senhores,  the  gentlemen ;  dos 
senhores,  of  the  gentlemen. 

The  feminine  article  a  must  be  prefixed  to  senhora,  my 
lady,  or  madam ;  as,  a  senhora  duqueza,  or  condessa  de,  &c., 
my  lady  duchess,  or  countess  of,  &c. 

The  article  is  never  used  in  Portuguese  as  it  is  in 
English,  before  mais,  more,  or  menos,  less,  in  the  following 
sentences  :  quanto  mais  vivemos,  tanto  mais  aprendemos, 
the  longer  we  live,  the  more  we  learn ;  quanto  mais  um 
hydropico  bebe,  tanto  mais  stde  tdm,  the  more  a  dropsical 
man  drinks  the  more  thirsty  he  is  ;  quanto  mais  pobre  e  o 
homem,  tanto  menos  cuidados  tern,  the  poorer  a  man  is,  the 
less  care  he  has,  <kc. 


154  SYNTAX    OF    NOUNS. 

Sometimes  the  English  particle  to,  before  infinitives, 
is  rendered  in  Portuguese  by  the  article  o  ;  as,  e  facil  o 
dizer,  o  ver,  &c.,  it  is  easy  to  say,  to  see,  &c. 

In  a  word,  the  natural  associators  with  articles  are  those 
common  appellatives  which  denote  the  several  genera  and 
species  of  beings,  or  those  words  which,  though  indefinite, 
are  yet  capable,  through  the  article,  of  becoming  definite. 
Therefore  Apollonius  makes  it  part  of  the  pronoun's  defini- 
tion, to  refuse  coalescence  with  the  article  :  and  it  would 
be  absurd  to  say,  o  eu,  the  I ;  or,  o  tu,  the  thou ;  because 
nothing  can  make  those  pronouns  more  definite  than  they 
are. 

Note.  When  the  adjective  um,  nma,  is  used  as  an  article 
in  Portuguese,  it  denotes  individuals  as  unknown ;  but 
the  articles  o,  a,  denote  individuals  as  known.  Example  : 
Seeing  an  object  pass  by  which  I  never  saw  till  then,  a 
beggar  with  a  long  beard,  for  instance,  I  say  :  Ali  vai  um 
pobre  com  uma  barba  comprida,  there  goes  a  beggar  with  a 
long  beard.  But  the  man  departs  and  returns  a  week 
after  ;  then  I  must  say,  A  li  vai  o  pobre  da  barba  comprida, 
there  goes  the  beggar  with  the  long  beard. 


CHAPTER  III. 

OF  THE  SYNTAX  OF  NOUNS. 
AND    FIRST,    OF    THE    SUBSTANTIVES. 

WHEN  two  or  more  substantives  come  together,  with- 
out a  comma  between  them,  they  all  govern  each  the 
next  in  the  genitive,  the  first  governing  the  second,  the 
second  the  third  in  the  same  case,  and  so  on  (that  is,  the 


SYNTAX    OF    ADJECTIVES.  155 

first  is  always  followed  by  the  preposition  de,  or  by  the 
article  before  the  next  noun) ;  but  that  genitive  can  never 
come  in  Portuguese  before  the  noun  that  governs  it  as  in 
English. 

A  philosophia  de  Newton,  Newton's  philosophy. 

As  guardas  do  principe,  the  prince's  guards. 

A  porta  de  casa,  the  house-gate. 

Eis  aqui  a  casa  do  companheiro  do  irmdo  de  minha 
mulker,  here  is  my  wife's  brother's  partner's  house. 

When  two  substantives  singular  are  the  nominative  of 
a  verb,  the  verb  must  be  put  in  the  plural ;  as,  men 
irmdo  e  men  pai  estdo  no  campo,  my  brother  and  my  father 
are  in  the  country. 

If  the  nominative  is  a  collective  substantive,  the  verb 
is  always  put  in  the  singular ;  as,  toda  a  cidade  assistio, 
all  the  city  was  present. 

OF    THE    SYNTAX    OF    ADJECTIVES. 

Of  adjectives,  some  are  put  before  the  noun,  and-  some 
after;  and  others  may  be  put  indifferently,  either  before 
or  after. 

The  possessive  pronouns,  meu,  teu,  sen,  &c.,  and 
adjectives  of  number,  come  before  the  substantive,  as  in 
English.  Examples  :  Meu  pai,  my  father  ;  a  sua  casa,  his 
house  ;  duas  pessoas,  two  persons  ;  o  primeiro  homem,  the 
first  man. 

But  when  an  adjective  of  number  stands  for  a  sur- 
name, or  is  joined  to  a  proper  or  Christian  name,  it  comes 
after  the  substantive,  without  the  article ;  as,  Joao  V., 
John  the  Fifth. 


156  SYNTAX    OF    ADJECTIVES. 


THE    FOLLOWING   ADJECTIVES    COME    AFTER    THE 
SUBSTANTIVE. 

1st.  Verbal  adjectives  and  participles  :  as,  um  homem 
divertido,  a  comical,  a  merry  man  ;  uma  mulfier  estimada, 
a  woman  esteemed. 

2ndly.  Adjectives  referring  to  nations  :  as,  um  matke- 
matico  Inglez,  an  English  mathematician ;  um  alfaiate 
Francez,  a  French  tailor ;  musica  Italiana,  Italian  music. 

3rdly.  Adjectives   of  colour  :  as,  um  vestido  negro,  a 
black  suit  of  cloths  ;  um  capote  vermelho,  a  red  cloak,  &c. 
4thly.  Adjectives  of  figure  :  as,  uma  mesa  redonda,  a 
round  table ;  um  campo  triangular,  a  triangular  field,  &c. 

Sthly.  Adjectives  expressing  some  physical  or  natural 
quality  :  such  are,  quente,  hot ;  frio,  cold ;  humido,  wet ; 
corcovado,  hunchbacked,  &c. 

Most  other  adjectives  are  placed  before  or  after  the 
substantive  :  as,  santo,  holy ;  verdadeiro,  true,  &c. 

If  the  substantive  has  three  or  more  adjectives  belong- 
ing to  it,  they  must  be  placed  after  it  with  the  conjunc- 
tion e  before  the  last,  which  must  likewise  be  observed, 
even  when  there  be  but  two  adjectives.  The  Portuguese 
do  not  say,  uma  desagradavel  enfadonha  obra,  but,  uma 
obra  desagradavel  e  enfadonha,  a  disagreeable  tedious 
work,  etc. 

Of  adjectives,  some  always  require  either  a  noun  or 
verb  after  them,  which  they  govern  ;  as,  digno  de  louvor, 
praiseworthy ;  digno  de  ser  amado,  worthy  to  be  loved  ; 
capaz  de  ensinar,  capable  to  teach  ;  and  these  have  always 
the  particle  de  after  them. 

Some  will  be  used  in  an  absolute  sense  without  being 
attended  by  any  noun  or  verb ;  as,  prudente,  wise  incu- 
ravel,  incurable,  &c. 


SYNTAX    OF    ADJECTIVES.  157 

Others  may  be  construed  both  with  or  without  a  noun, 
which  they  govern  :  ella  6  uma  mulher  insensivel,  she  is  a 
woman  without  any  sensibility ;  ella  e  insensivel  ao  amor, 
she  is  insensible  to  love. 

The  following  adjectives,  which  require  the  preposition 
de  before  the  next  infinitive,  govern  the  genitive  case. 
Observe,  that  some  of  them  require,  in  English,  the  pre- 
position at  or  with  after  them. 

Digno,  worthy  ;  as,  elle  e*  digno  de  louvor,  he  is  worthy 
of  praise.  This  adjective  is  sometimes  followed  by  que ; 
as,  digno  que  sen  nome  fosse,  &c.,  her  name  deserved  to 
be,  <fec. 

Indigno,  unworthy ;  as,  indigno  da  estima^ao  que 
fa$o  d'elle,  unworthy  of  the  esteem  which  I  have  for  him. 

Capaz,  capable ;  incapaz,  incapable :  as,  capaz  or 
incapaz  de  servir  a  propria  patria,  capable  or  incapable  of 
serving  one's  country. 

Notado,  charged ;  as,  notado  de  avareza,  charged  with 
avarice. 

Contente,  glad ;  as,  estou  contente  do  successo  que  elle 
teve,  I  am  glad  or  overjoyed  at  his  success. 

Cancado,  tired  ;  as,  can^ado  de  estudar,  tired  of  study- 
ing. 

Dezejoso,  greedy ;  as,  dezejoso  de  gloria,  greedy  of  glory, 
&c.  And  likewise  adjectives  signifying  fulness,  emptiness, 
plenty,  want,  desire,  knowledge,  remembrance,  ignorance, 
or  forgetting. 

All  adjectives  signifying  inclination,  advantage  and 
disadvantage,  profit  or  loss,  pleasure  or  displeasure,  due 
submission,  resistance,  likeness,  govern  the  dative  case  : 
as,  insensivel  ds  affrontas,  insensible  to  affronts  ;  ser  inclin- 
ado  d  alguma  cousa,  to  be  inclined  to  something  ;  nocivo 
d  saude,  hurtful  to  health. 

Adjectives  signifying  dimensions :  as,  alto,  high,  tall ; 


158  SYNTAX    OF    ADJECTIVES. 

largo,  wide,  broad ;  and  comprido,  long,  come  after  words 
of  the  measure  of  magnitude,  both  in  English  and  Portu- 
guese ;  but  they  are  preceded  by  de  in  Portuguese :  as, 
dez  pe&  de  largo,  ten  feet  broad ;  seis  pes  de  comprido,  six 
feet  long,  &c.  They  also  turn  the  adjective  of  dimension 
into  its  corresponding  substantive,  with  the  preposition 
de,  and  preceded  by  the  measure  :  as,  seis  pes  de  altura, 
six  feet  high  ;  dez  pes  de  largura,  ten  feet  broad. 

Adjectives  signifying  experience,  knowledge,  or  science, 
require  em,  or  no,  na,  nos,  nas,  after  them :  as,  versado  nos 
livros,  versed  in  books ;  experto  na  medicina,  expert  in 
medicine. 

Cardinal  nouns  require  the  genitive  case  after  them ; 
as,  um  dos  dois,  one  of  the  two. 

The  ordinal  nouns,  as  well  as  collective  and  propor- 
tional nouns,  likewise  require  the  genitive  after  them : 
as,  o  primeiro  dos  r£is,  the  first  of  the  kin^s ;  uma  duzia 
de  ovos,  a  dozen  of  eggs,  &c. 

OP   THE    SYNTAX    OF    COMPARATIVES    AND    SUPERLATIVES. 

The  comparative  is  not  made  of  the  positive  in  Portu- 
guese, as  in  Latin  and  English,  but  by  adding  mais,  more, 
or  menos,  less,  which  govern  que,  signifying  than  :  as,  o 
todo  e  mais  que  a  parte,  the  whole  is  greater  than  a  part ; 
o  seu  amante  e  mais  bello,  mais  mo$o,  e  mais  rico  que  ella, 
her  lover  is  handsomer,  younger,  and  richer,  than  she  is  ; 
eu  acko-o  agora  menos  bello  do  que  quando  o  comprei,  I  now 
find  it  less  handsome  than  when  I  bought  it. 

The  simple  comparatives  mais  and  menos,  followed  by 
a  noun  of  number,  have  de  after  them :  as,  ainda  que  elle 
tivesse  mais  de  cem  homens,  though  he  had  above  a  hun- 
dred men ;  elle  tern  mais  de  vinte  annos,  he  is  above 
twenty, 


SYNTAX   OP   PROXOUN3.  159 

When  the  comparison  is  made  by  so  as,  as  much  as, 
they  must  be  rendered  by  como. 

EXAMPLES. 

0  meu  livro  e  tao  hello  como  o  vosso,  my  book  is  as 
handsome  as  yours ;  um  principe  nao  £  tao  poderoso  como 
um  rei,  a  prince  is  not  so  powerful  as  a  king. 

They  put  sometimes  muito  and  pouco  before  the  simple 
comparatives  mais  and  menos  :  as,  elle  4  muito  mais  grande, 
he  is  taller  by  much  ;  elle  e  pouco  mais  grande,  he  is  taller 
by  little,  &c. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
OF  THE  SYNTAX  OF  PKONOUNS. 

WE  have  sufficiently  explained  the  pronouns  in  the 
First  Part ;  and,  to  avoid  any  further  repetition,  shall 
only  observe  that, 

1st.  The  English  make  use  of  the  verb  to  be,  put 
impersonally  through  all  its  tenses  in  the  third  person, 
before  the  personal  pronouns,  /,  thou,  he,  she,  we,  you,  they; 
it  it  I,  it  is  he,  &c.  In  Portuguese  the  verb  to  be,  on  this 
occasion,  is  not  impersonal;  as  they  express,  it  is  I,  by 
sou  eu  ;  it  is  thou,  es  tu;  it  is  he,  </  elle  ;  it  is  we,  somos 
no's  ;  it  is  ye,  sois  vos  ;  it  is  she,  </  ella  ;  it  is  they,  masc,, 
sdo  elles  ;  it  is  they,  fern.,  sao  ellas:  and  in  like  manner 
through  all  the  tenses ;  as,  it  was  I,  era  eu  ;  it  was  we, 
eramos  nos,  <fec. 

2ndly.  The  Portuguese  seldom  make  use  of  the  second 


160  SYNTAX    OF    PRONOUNS. 

person  singular,  except  when  through  a  great  familiarity 
among  friends  ;  or  a  father  and  mother  to  their  children ; 
or  to  servants. 

Observe  here,  that  when  an  adjective  comes  after 
vmce,  v.  s.,  v.  e.,  &c.,  it  does  not  agree  in  gender  with  vmce, 
v.  s.,  &c.,  but  with  the  person  we  speak  to,  or  we  speak  of : 
thus  we  say  to  a  lady,  vmce  6  muito  bella,  you  are  very 
beautiful ;  and  to  a  man,  vmce  e  muito  bom,  you  are  very 
good. 

Srdly.  N6s  is  generally  used  by  a  king,  a  governor, 
or  a  bishop,  in  their  writings,  and  then  it  signifies  in 
English,  we ;  as,  n6s  mandamos,  or  mandamos,  we  com- 
mand :  but  nos  before  or  after  a  verb  in  Portuguese  signi- 
fies us  in  English ;  as,  elle  nos  disse,  he  told  us ;  d-ai  nos 
tempo,  give  us  time. 

4thly.  V6s  is  applied  when  speaking  to  God  or  to  a 
multitude. 

5thly.  The  conjunctive  pronouns  are  joined  to  verbs, 
and  stand  for  the  dative  and  accusative  cases  ;  as,  deu-me, 
he  gave  me  ;  ama-me,  love  me  :  but  the  personal  pronouns 
are  used  instead  of  them  when  they  are  preceded  by  a 
preposition,  and  not  immediately  followed  by  a  verb  ;  elle 
fallou  contra  mim,  he  spoke  against  me. 

6thly.  When  o,  a,  os,  as,  are  joined  to  the  present 
tense,  infinitive  mood,  they  change  the  last  r  of  it  into  lo, 
la,  &c.,  thus :  para  ama-lo,  to  love  him ;  para  ve-la  or  ve- 
las,  to  see  her  or  them,  &c.;  and  when  they  are  joined  to 
the  preterperfect  tense,  indicative  mood,  of  the  verb 
fazer,  and  some  others  that  have  that  tense  ending  in  iz  ; 
they  change  the  last  z  of  them  into  lo,  la,  &c.;  &s,fi-lo,  I 
did  it ;  elle  fe-lo,  he  did  or  made  it,  &c. :  but  when  they 
are  joined  to  the  future  tense,  indicative  mood,  of  any 
verb  with  the  auxiliary  verb  haver,  then  they  change  the 
terminations  rei,  rds,  &c.,  of  the  futures  into  lo,  la. 


SYNTAX    OF    PRONOUNS.  161 

<fec.;  as,  fa-lo-heit  I  will  do  it ;    ama-lo-hei,   I   will    love 
him,  &c.* 

REMARKS   ON    THE   PRONOUNS. 

1st.  Him  or  it,  which  follows  the  verb  in  English, 
must  be  expressed  in  Portuguese  as  in  the  following 
examples : — 

When  him  or  it  in  English  follows  the  verb  in  the  first 
person  of  the  singular  number,  it  must  be  expressed  in 
Portuguese  by  o  before  or  after  the  verb.  Example  :  I 
call  him  or  it,  eu  o  chamo. 

When  him  or  it  in  English  follows  the  verb  in  the  first 
person  of  the  singular  number,  it  may  be  expressed  in 
Portuguese  either  by  o  before  the  verb,  or  after  it,  omit- 
ting the  last  consonant  of  the  verb.  Example  :  thou 
callest  him  or  it,  tu  o  chamas,  or  chdma-lc-tu. 

When  him  or  it  is  joined  with  the  third  person  singu- 
lar of  a  verb,  it  may  be  expressed  by  o  before  or  after  the 
verb.  Example  :  he  calls  him  or  it,  elle  o  ckama,  or  die 
chama-o. 

When  him  or  it  is  with  a  verb  in  the  first  person 
plural,  it  may  be  expressed  in  Portuguese  either  by  o 
before  the  verb  or  lo  after  it ;  omitting  the  last  consonant, 
as  in  the  second  case.  Example  :  we  call  him  or  it,  nos 
o  chamamos,  or  nos  chamamo-lo. 

*  In  regard  to  all  that  is  said  concerning  the  change  of  termina- 
tions into  lo,  la,  los,  las,  we  beg  to  observe  that  the  modern  and 
best  writing  in  such  cases,  where  the  relatives  o,  a,  os,  as,  are  to  be 
appended  to  verbs  ending  in  r,  s,  or  z,  is  to  change,  for  the  sake  of 
harmony,  all  those  letters  into  I,  and  then  add  the  relative,  con- 
necting by  an  -.  The  I  being  then  but  the  substitute  for  those 
three  letters  is  thus  better  placed  where  they  stood :  so  the  forms 
chdmal-o,  thou  callest  him  or  it ;  fazel-a,  to  make  it ;  fal-os,  makes 
them;  nomeail-as,  you  name  them,  &c.,  are  only  better  sounding 
transformations  for  chdmas-o,  fazer-a,  faz-os,  ntmeais-as. 

M 


162  SYNTAX  OF  PRONOUNS. 

When  him  or  it  is  after  a  verb  in  the  second  person 
plural,  it  is  expressed  in  Portuguese  either  by  o  before 
the  verb,  or  lo  after  it,  omitting  the  last  consonant,  &c. 
Example  :  you  call  him  or  it,  v6s  o  chamais,  or  vos 
chamai-lo. 

When  him  or  it  follows  the  verb  in  the  third  person 
plural,  it  may  be  expressed  in  Portuguese  either  by  o 
before  the  verb,  or  no  after  it.  Example :  they  call  him 
or  it,  elles  o  chamao,  or  elles  chamao-no.* 

2ndly.  Her  or  it  after  a  verb  in  English  is  expressed 
•n  Portuguese  by  a,  according  to  the  rules  given  above. 

3rdly.  Them  after  a  verb  is  expressed  in  Portuguese 
by  os  for  the  masculine,  and  by  as  for  the  feminine, 
according  to  the  gender  and  the  rules  proposed. 

4thly.  The  words  o,  a,  os,  as,  must  always  be  put  after 
the  gerunds,  but  not  before  the  infinitives.  Examples : 
seeing  him,  we  must  not  say  o  vendo,  but  vendo-o,  because 
vendo  is  a  gerund,  j  To  see  him,  instead  of  saying  para 

*  Let  the  student  remark  that  the  no,  na,  nos,  nas,  in  cases  like 
this,  are  not  the  same  as  the  combination  of  the  preposition  em 
with  the  articles,  which  assumes  the  like  forms ;  the  n  is  here 
employed  only  to  avoid  hiatus,  nearly  as  the  Greeks,  for  the  same 
purpose,  used  sometimes  their  v,  corresponding  to  our  n.  The  best 
writing,  therefore,  is  that  now  used  by  some  writers  for  the  sake  of 
distinction,  of  marking  the  n  with  an  ',  thus,  chamao-rfo ;  or,  as 
others  do,  isolating  it  by  hyphens,  thus,  chamiio-n-o,  in  like  manner 
as  the  French  add  their  t  in  Va-t-il  vu  ? 

f  When,  however,  o,  a,  os,  as,  and  the  gerund  are  to  be  used, 
preceded  by  the  preposition  em,  in  the  acceptations  of  as  soon  as, 
immediately  after,  the  moment,  then  those  pronouns  are  placed 
before  the  gerund  and  after  the  said  preposition  :  as,  em  o  vendo,  as 
soon  as  I  (or  thou,  or  he,  or  she,  or  you,  or  they)  see  (seest,  sees, 
&G.,  or  saw,  sawest,  &c.,  or  have  seen,  hast  seen,  &c.,  or  shall  see, 
shalt  see,  &c.,  or  shall  have  seen,  &c. )  him;  em  a  encontrando, 
immediately  after  I  (or  thou,  or  he,  &c.)  meet  (meetest,  met,  have 
met,  shall  meet,  shall  have  met,  &c.)  her;  em  os  comendo,  the 
moment  I  (or  thou,  &c.)  ate  (or  have  eaten,  shall  eat,  &c.)  them. 


SYNTAX  OF  VERBS.  163 

ver-o,  you  must  say  para,  o  ver,  or  para  ve-lo,  because  it  is 
in  the  infinitive. 

5thly.  The  words  to,  la,  Ion,  las,  must  always  be  put 
after  the  verbs.  Example :  to  see  him,  you  must  say 
para  vel-o,  or  para  o  ver,  and  not  para  lo  ver.  The  same 
words  must  follow  also  the  adverb  ei :  as,  ei-lo  aqui,  here 
he  is ;  ei-lo  ali,  there  he  is ;  ei-las  aqui,  here  they  are  ; 
ei-la  ali,  there  she  is ;  ei-las  ali,  there  they  are.  They 
follow  likewise  the  persons  of  the  verbs  :  eu  fi-lo,  tufizeste- 
lo,  elle  fe-lo,  n6s  fizemo-lo,  «fec.,  I  made  it,  <fcc. 

I  have  been  speaking  of  the  words  o,  a,  os,  as,  lo,  la, 
los,  las,  and  not  of  the  articles,  o,  a,  os,  as  ;  because  when 
those  words  precede,  and  sometimes  when  they  follow  the 
verbs,  they  are  not  articles,  but  relative  pronouns.  They 
are  articles  only  when  they  precede  nouns  or  pronouns. 


CHAPTER  V. 
OF  THE  SYNTAX  OF  VEEBS. 

THE  verbs  through  every  tense  and  mood  (except  the 
infinitive)  ought  to  be  preceded  by  a  nominative  case, 
either  expressed  or  understood,  with  which  they  must 
agree  in  number  and  person.  The  nominative  is  expressed 
when  we  say  eu  amo,  tu  cantas  ;  understood  when  we  say 
canto,  digo,  &c. 

The  Portuguese,  as  well  as  English,  use  the  second 
person  plural,  though  they  address  themselves  but  to  a 
single  person. 


164  SYNTAX  OF  VERBS. 

EXAMPLES. 

Men  amigo,  vos  ndo  tendes  razdo,  my  friend,  you  are  in 
the  wrong. 

And  if  we  would  speak  in  the  third  person,  we  must 
say,  vmce  tern  razdo,  sir,  you  are  in  the  right. 

The  verb  active  governs  the  accusative ;  as,  amo  a 
virtude,  I  love  virtue. 

The  passive  verb  requires  an  ablative  after  it ;  as,  o$ 
doutos  sdo  envejados  pelos  ignorantes,  the  learned  are  envied 
by  the  ignorant. 

There  is  in  Portuguese  another  way  of  making  the 
passive,  by  adding  the  relative  se  to  the  third  person 
singular  or  plural ;  as,  ama-se  a  Deus,  God  is  loved. 

Where  there  are  two  nominatives  singular  before  a 
verb,  it  must  be  put  in  the  plural. 

When  a  noun  is  collective,  the  verb  requires  the 
singular,  not  the  plural ;  as,  a  gente  estd  olhando,  the 
people  are  looking. 


SYNTAX    OF   THE   AUXILIARY   VERB. 

The  verb  ter  is  made  use  of  to  conjugate  all  the  com- 
pound tenses  of  verbs ;  as,  tenho  amado,  tinha  amado,  I 
have  loved,  I  had  loved. 

Ter  signifies  also  to  possess,  to  obtain ;  as,  tenho 
dinheiro,  I  have  money ;  tern  muita  capacidade,  he  has  a 
great  deal  of  capacity. 

Haver,  in  account-books  and  trade,  expresses  credit,  or 
discharge. 

Haver  is  also  taken  impersonally  in  Portuguese,  and 
signifies  in  English  there  be  ;  as,  ha  muito  euro  no  Mexico, 
there  is  a  great  quantity  of  gold  in  Mexico. 

Haver  se,  made  reciprocal,  is  the  same  as  to  behave,  to 


SYNTAX  OF  VERBS.  165 

<ict ;  as,  houve-se  o  governador  com  tal  prudencia,  que,  <fec., 
the  governor  behaved  with  such  wisdom,  that,  <fec. 

We  have  already  observed  the  difference  between  ser 
and  estar. 

The  verb  estar  is  also  used  to  conjugate  the  other 
verbs,  chiefly  expressing  action ;  as,  estou  lendo,  estou 
€screvendo,  I  am  reading,  I  am  writing. 

Estar  with  the  preposition  em,  in,  or  with  no,  na,  nos 
nas,  signifies,  to  be  present  in  a  place ;  as,  estou  no  campo, 
I  am  in  the  country. 

Estar  with  the  preposition  para  denotes  the  inclination 
of  doing  what  the  following  verb  expresses,  but  without  a 
full  determination  ;  as,  estou  para  me  ir  para  Londres,  I 
have  a  mind  to  go  to  London. 

Estar  with  the  preposition  por,  and  the  infinitive  mood 
following,  means,  that  the  thing  expressed  by  the  verb  is 
not  yet  done :  as,  isto  estd  por  escrever,  this  is  not  yet 
written;  isto  estd  por  alimpar,  this  is  not  yet  cleaned. 
Estar  por  alguem  signifies  to  agree  with  one,  or  to  be  of 
his  opinion. 

Note.  See,  in  the  Third  Part,  the  different  significations 
of  the  verbs  estar  and  haver. 

When  ser  signifies  the  possession  of  a  thing,  it  governs 
the  genitive :  as,  a  rua  e  d'el-rei,  the  street  belongs  to 
the  king  ;  esta  casa  I  de  men  pai,  this  house  belongs  to  my 
father. 

Em  ser  is  taken  for  a  thing  to  be  whole  or  entire, 
without  any  alteration  or  mutilation ;  as,  as  fazendas 
fstdo  em  sert  the  goods  are  not  sold. 

OP   THE   SYNTAX   OP   VERBS   ACTIVE,    PASSIVE,    ETC. 

When  two  verbs  come  together,  with  or  without  any 
nominative  case,  then  the  latter  must  be  in  the  infinitive 


166  SYNTAX  OF  VERBS. 

mood ;  as,  quer  vmce  aprender  a  fallar  o  Inglez  ?  will  you 
learn  to  speak  English  1 

All  verbs  active  govern  the  accusative  ;  but  if  they 
are  followed  by  a  proper  name  of  God,  man,  or  women,  or 
any  noun  expressing  their  qualities  or  title,  then  they 
govern  the  dative  case  :  as,  conhec(o  a  sen  pai,  I  know  his 
father ;  Achardo  a  Jodo  no  caminho,  they  found  John  in 
the  road. 

All  verbs  of  gesture,  movement,  going,  remaining,  or 
doing,  as  also  the  verbs  that  have  the  word  that  goes 
before  and  the  word  that  comes  after,  both  belonging  to- 
one  thing,  require  the  nominative  after  them :  as,  Pedro 
vai  err  ado,  Peter  goes  on  wrong  ;  o  pobre  dorme  descan$ado, 
the  poor  sleep  without  care.  Also  the  verb  in  the  infini- 
tive mood  has  the  same  case,  when  verbs  of  wishing 
and  the  like  come  after  them  :  as,  todos  dezejdo  ser  ricos, 
everybody  wishes  to  be  rich  ;  antes  quisera  ser  douto  que 
parecel-o,  I  had  rather  be  learned  than  be  accounted  so. 

After  verbs  the  Portuguese  express  yes  and  no  by  que 
sim  and  que  ndo.  Examples  :  creio  que  sim,  I  believe  yes ; 
creio  que  ndo,  I  believe  not ;  digo  que  sim,  I  say  yes  ;  cuido 
que  ndo,  I  think  not ;  aposto  que  sim,  I  lay  yes  ;  queireis 
apostar  que  ndo  ?  have  you  a  mind  to  lay  not  ? 

Verbs  signifying  grief,  compassion,  want,  remembrance, 
forgetting,  &c.,  must  have  the  genitive  :  as,  pesa-me  muito 
da  morte  de  seu  irmdo,  I  am  very  sorry  for  the  death  of 
your  brother ;  elle  morre  de  fame,  he  perishes  of  hunger ; 
lembre-se  do  que  me  disse,  remember  what  you  said  to  me ; 
compadefi-me  das  suas  desgraq as ;  I  pitied  him  for  his 
misfortunes ;  esqued-me  de  tudo  isto,  all  this  I  forgot. 

The  reciprocals  of  jeering,  boasting,  and  distrusting, 
govern  also  the  genitive  ;  as,  jactar-se,  gloriar-se,  picar-se> 
envorgonhar-se,  &c. 

All  verbs  active  govern  the  dative  when  the  substan- 


SYNTAX  OP  VERBS.  167 

tive  represents  a  person ;  as,  eu  conhe$o  a  vmcf,  <fec.,  I  know 
you,  &c. 

The  following  verbs  belong  to  this  rule  :— 

Jogar,  to  play  :  as,  jogar  as  cartas,  to  play  at  cards  ; 
jogar  aos  centos,  to  play  at  piquet ;  jogar  ao  xadrez,  to  play 
at  chess,  &c. 

Obedecer,  desobedecer,  agradar,  comprazer :  as,  eu  obede^o 
a  Deus  e  a  el-rei,  I  obey  God  and  the  king ;  comprazed  em 
tudo  aos  soldados,  in  all  he  pleased  the  soldiers. 

Mandar,  when  it  signifies  to  command  an  army,  com- 
pany, &c.,  requires  the  accusative,  but,  when  anything 
else,  the  dative  :  as,  elle  mandava  a  cavallaria,  he  com- 
manded the  horse  ;  o  governador  mandou  a  todos  os  mora- 
dores  que  se  retirassem  para  suas  casas,  the  governor 
ordered  all  the  inhabitants  to  retire  into  their  houses. 

Ir,  to  go ;  as,  vou  a  Paris,  \  go  to  Paris. 

Assistir,  ajudar,  soccorrer,  to  help ;  assistir  ao  officio 
divino,  to  assist  at  divine  service. 

Saudar,  to  salute  or  greet ;  as,  elle  sauda  a  lodos,  he 
salutes  everybody. 

Fallar,  to  speak  ;  satizfazer,  to  satisfy  ;  servir,  to  serve  ; 
favorecer,  to  favour  ;  ameaqar,  to  threaten. 

The  verbs  of  pleasing,  displeasing,  granting,  denying, 
pardoning,  govern  the  dative  case. 

The  impersonals  acontecer,  succeder,  importar,  pertencer, 
and  the  like  to  these,  often  have  two  personal  datives : 
as,  a  mim  me  succedeo,  it  happened  to  me  ;  a  elle  I  he  con 
vem,  it  suits  him,  or  it  is  convenient  for  him ;  a  elle  nao 
Ihe  importa,  it  does  not  concern  him,  &c. 

All  active  verbs  require  the  accusative  ;  and  the  Latin 
verbs  which  govern  the  accusative  of  the  thing,  and  the 
dative  of  the  person,  govern  generally  the  same  in  Portu- 
guese :  as,  escreve  o  que  digo  a  teu  irmdo,  write  to  your 
brother  what  I  say. 

Verbs  of   asking,  teaching,  arraying,   must  have  an 


168.  SYNTAX  OF  VERBS. 

accusative  of  the  doer  or  sufferer,  and  sometimes  neuter 
verbs  will  have  an  accusative  of  the  thing  :  as,  gozar  saude, 
to  enjoy  health ;  pe$o  este  favor,  I  ask  this  favour  ;  elle 
toca  muito  bem  a  flauta,  he  plays  very  well  on  the  flute ; 
curar  uma  doen$a,  to  cure  a  sickness. 

Passive  verbs,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  reciprocal 
verbs,  require  the  ablative,  with,  de,  do,  da,  dos,  das,  por, 
or  pelo,  pela,  pelos,  pelas :  as,  fui  chamado  por  el-rei,  I  was 
called  by  the  king ;  reterei-me  da  cidade,  I  retired  from  the 
city  ;  elle  foi  amado  do  povo,  he  was  loved  by  the  people. 
Except  acostar-se,  which  requires  a  dative,  preceded  by  a  / 
encostar-se,  which  sometimes  will  have  a  dative  and  some- 
times an  ablative,  preceded  by  em,  no,  na,  nos,  or  nas  ; 
meter-se,  sentar-se,  introduzir-se,  &c.,  which  must  have  the 
ablative  with  the  preposition  em,  no,  na,  nos,  nas. 

Verbs  joined  to  a  noun  which  they  govern  must  have 
the  infinitive  with  de ;  as,  tenho  vontade  de  rir,  I  am 
inclined  to  laugh. 

The  price  of  anything  bought,  or  sold,  or  bartered, 
must  have  the  accusative  with  por. 

The  verb  por-se,  when  it  signifies  to  begin,  requires  the 
infinitive,  with  the  particle  a  ;  as,  por-se  a  chorar,  to  begin 
to  cry. 

Verbs  of  plenty,  filling,  emptying,  loading,  unloading, 
require  the  ablative  :  as,  esta  terra  abunda  de  trigo,  this 
country  abounds  with  corn  ;  elle  estd  carregado  de  miserias, 
he  is  loaded  with  calamities. 

Verbs  denoting  custom,  help,  beginning,  exhortation, 
invitation,  require  the  infinitive  with  the  particle  a :  as, 
ajudar  a  semear,  to  help  to  sow ;  convidou-me  a  cear,  he 
invited  me  to  supper. 

Verbs  that  signify  distance,  receiving,  or  taking  away, 
will  have  the  ablative ;  as,  a  Madeira  dista  de  Marrocos 
320  milhas,  Madeira  lies  320  miles  from  Morocco 


SYNTAX  OF  VERBS.  169 

Verbs  signifying  receiving,  or  taking  away,,  generally 
require  the  ablative  of  the  person ;  but  they  sometimes 
require  an  accusative,  particularly  the  verb  receber,  when 
it  signifies  to  welcome  or  to  entertain :  as,  elle  recebe  todos 
com  muito  agrado,  he  gives  his  company  a  hearty  reception, 
he  makes  them  very  welcome. 

Verbs  denoting  obligation  govern  the  infinitive  with 
the  preposition  a ;  as,  eu  o  obrigarei  a  fazer  isto,  I  will 
oblige  him  to  do  it. 

Verbs  of  arguing,  quarrelling,  fighting,  &c.,  must  have 
the  ablative  with  com  ;  as,  pelejou  mais  de  uma  hora  com 
sen  irmdOj  he  quarrelled  more  than  one  hour  with  his 
brother. 

After  the  verb  ser,  to  be,  para  is  made  use  of  as  well 
as  a  :  the  first  is  employed  to  denote  the  use  or  destina- 
tion of  anything ;  as,  esta  penna  e  para  escrever,  this  pen 
is  to  write  with.  But  the  particle  a  is  used  to  denote 
only  the  action ;  as,  elle  foi  o  primeiro  a  fugir,  he  was  the 
first  to  run  away. 

Verbs  of  motion  to  a  place  always  govern  the  dative ; 
as,  vou  d  comedia,  I  go  to  the  play ;  though  the  verb 
voltar,  to  return,  may  also  have  an  accusative,  with  the 
preposition  para.  But  verbs  of  motion  from  a  place 
govern  the  ablative  with,  de,  do,  da,  dos,  das  ;  as,  venho 
do  campo,  I  come  from  the  country.  If  the  motion  is 
through  a  place,  then  they  govern  the  accusative,  with 
por ;  as,  passarei  por  Londres,  I  will  come  by  the  way  of 
London. 

OF   THE   USE   AND    CONSTRUCTION    OF   THE   TENSES. 

Although  I  have  spoken  at  large  upon  the  tenses  in 
the  First  Part,  I  would  further  observe — 

1.  That  the  infinitive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  haver  is 


170  SYNTAX  OF  VERBS. 

used  together  with  the  pronouns  lo,  la,  los,  las,  instead  of 
the  future  indicative  ;  as,  ouvil-o-hei,  I  will  hear  him  :  and 
then  the  r  of  the  infinitive  is  changed  into  lo,  la,  los,  las.* 
Sometimes  the  infinitive  of  the  auxiliary  verb  haver  is  used 
with  the  pronouns  conjunctive,  me,  te,  se,  &c.,  instead  of 
the  same  future  :  as,  dar-l/ie-hei,  I  will  give  him  ;  enfadar- 
se-ha,  he  will  be  angry. 

2.  That  when  we  find  the  particle  if,  which  in  Portu- 
guese is  expressed  by  se,  before  the  imperfect  indicative, 
we  must  generally  use  the  imperfect  subjunctive  in  Portu- 
guese.    Examples  :  se  eu  tivesse,  if  I  had  ;  se  eu  jmdesse,  if 
I  could.     But  sometimes  the  imperfect  indicative  is  used  ; 
as,  disse-lhe  que  se  queria,  &c.,  he  told  him  that  if  he  was 
willing,  &c. 

3.  That  the  first  imperfect  subjunctive  in  Portuguese 
is  also  used  in  a  sense  that  denotes  the  present,  especially 
in  sentences  of  wishing  ;  as,  quizera  que  Domingo  fizessc 
bom  tempo,  I  wish  it  would  be  fine  weather  on  Sunday. 
But  if  the  same  tense  is  preceded  by  ainda  que,  although, 
then  it  must  be  rendered  into  Portuguese  by  the  second 
imperfect  subjunctive,  or  by  the  imperfect  indicative ;  as, 
eu  ndo  a  quizera,  ainda  que  ella  tivesse  milhoens  de  seu, 
though  she  were  worth  several  millions,  I  would  not  have 
her ;  ainda  que  elle  consentisse  n'isso,  ndo  se  podia  fazer, 
although  he  would  consent  to  it  that  could  not  be  done. 
Lastly,  when  the  first  imperfect  subjunctive  is  preceded 
by  se,  it  is  sometimes  rendered  into  Portuguese  by  the 
second  imperfect  subjunctive  ;  as,  se  elle  viesse,  if  he  should 
come. 

The  English  are  apt  to  put  the  first  imperfect  of  the 
subjunctive  where  the  Portuguese  make  use  of  the  second  ; 

*  At  present  the  form  used  in  such  cases  is  to  change  the  fina 
r  of  the  verb  into  Z,  and  add  the  articles  or  pronouns,  o,  a,  os,  as 
&c.,  connecting  them  by  an  -,  so,  ouvil-o-hei,  &c. 


SYNTAX  OF  VERBS.  171 

as,  I  had  been  in  the  wrong,  ndo  teria  tido  razdo  :  and 
though  they  may  say,  ndo  tivera  tido  razdo,  they  may  not 
say,  ndo  tivesse  tido  razdo,  to  express  the  English  of  I  should 
have  been  in  the  wrong,  or  /  had  been  in  the  wrong. 

Note,  that  to  express  in  Portuguese,  though  tJiat  should 
be,  we  must  say  quando  isso  fosse,  and  not  seria. 

The  Portuguese  use  the  future  tense  subjunctive  after 
the  conjunction  if,  when  they  speak  of  a  future  action, 
but  the  English,  the  present  indicative.  Examples  :  to- 
morrow, if  I  have  time,  aman/id  se  tiver  tempo,  and  not  se 
tenho ;  if  he  come  we  shall  see  him,  n6s  o  veremos  se  elle 
vier. 

A  conjunction  between  two  verbs  makes  the  last  of 
the  same  number,  person,  and  tense  as  the  first.  Examples  : 
the  king  wishes  and  commands,  el-rei  quer  e  ordena  ;  I  see 
and  I  know,  eu  vejo  e  conhe^o. 

Sometimes  the  present  is  made  use  of  instead  of  the 
preterdefinite  in  narrations ;  as,  ao  mesmo  tempo  que  hia 
andando  o  encontra,  o  despoja,  e  o  ata  a  uma  arvore,  as  he 
was  going,  he  meets  him,  strips  him,  and  ties  him  to  a 
tree. 

When  the  Portuguese  use  the  infinitive  with  the 
third  person  plural,  they  add  em  to  it,  and  it  is  generally 
preceded  by  por,  for,  and  para,  in  order  to,  that,  or  to  the 
end  that :  as,  elles  fordo  enforcados  por  furtarem,  they  were 
hanged  for  robbing ;  para  serem  informados,  to  the  end 
that  they  may  be  informed  ;  para  poderem  dizer,  that  they 
may  be  able  to  say. 

Observe  that  when  the  Portuguese  put  por  before  the 
first  future  subjunctive,  they  speak  of  a  time  past ;  as, 
por  fallardes,  because  you  have  spoken.  But  when  they 
put  para  before  it,  then  they  speak  of  a  time  to  come  ; 
as,  para  fallarmos,  to  give  us  an  opportunity  for  speaking, 
in  order  to  speak. 


172  SYNTAX  OF  VERBS. 

OF    MOODS. 

All  the  tenses  of  the  indicative  mood  may  be  employed 
without  any  conjunction  before  them ;  although  they 
admit  of  some.  Besides  the  conjunction  que,  those  that 
may  be  made  use  of  are  se,  como,  and  quando  ;  with  some 
distinction  in  respect  to  se,  because  this  conjunction  is 
seldom  used  before  the  future  tense,  and  then  it  is 
governed  by  a  verb  signifying  ignorance,  doubt,  or  inter- 
rogation :  as,  ndo  sei  se  hdo  de  vir,  I  do  not  know  whether 
they  will  come  ;  estou  em  duvida,  se  os  inimigos  passardo  o 
rio,  I  doubt  whether  the  enemy  will  pass  the  river ;  ndo 
pergunto  se  partird,  I  do  not  ask  whether  he  will  set  out. 

The  optative  or  subjunctive  in  Portuguese  has  always 
some  sign  annexed  :  as,  oxald,  prouvera  a  Deus,  6  se  / 
would  to  God,  God  grant,  &c.;  que  para,  que,  &c.,  that,  &c. 

The  particle  que  is  not  expressed  in  the  present  tense 
of  this  mood,  but  it  is  understood  in  sentences  of  wishing 
or  praying ;  as,  Deus  o  fa$a  bom,  let  God  amend  him. 

When  que  is  between  two  verbs,  the  last  is  not  always 
put  in  the  subjunctive,  because,  though  some  say,  creio 
que  venha,  I  believe  he  comes,  I  think  it  is  better  to  say, 
creio  gue  vem ;  but  when  there  is  a  negative,  the  verb 
following  que  must  be  put  in  the  subjunctive  :  as,  ndo 
creio  que  venha,  I  do  not  believe  he  will  come ;  ndo  creio 
que  venha  tdo  cedo,  I  do  not  believe  he  will  come  so  soon. 

When  the  verbs  crer,  to  believe,  saber,  to  know,  are 
use  interrogatively,  and  followed  by  the  particle  que, 
the  next  verb  is  put  in  the  indicative,  when  the  person 
who  asks  the  question  makes  no  doubt  of  the  thing  which 
is  the  object  of  the  question ;  as  if,  knowing  that  peace  is 
made,  I  want  to  know  if  the  people  whom  I  converse  with 
know  it  too,  I  should  express  myself  thus  :  sabeis  v6s  que 
estd  feita  a  paz  ?  do  you  know  that  peace  is  made  ?  But 


SYNTAX  OF  VERBS.  173 

if  I  have  it  only  by  a  report,  and  doubt  of  it,  and  want  to 
be  informed  of  it,  I  must  ask  the  question  thus :  sabeis 
v6s  que  a  paz  esteja  feita  ?  and  not  'sabeis  v6s  que  estd  feita 
a  paz  ? 

Observe  also,  that  the  present  subjunctive  of  saber  is 
elegantly  used  when  it  is  attended  by  a  negative  and  the 
particle  que  in  this  phrase,  ndo,  que  eu  saiba,  not  that  I 
know  of. 

All  the  verbs  used  impersonally  with  the  particle  que 
require  the  subjunctive  :  as,  e  preciso  que  ette  venha,  he 
must  come  ;  convem  que  isto  se  faca,  it  is  convenient  that 
this  be  done.  You  must  only  except  such  sentences  as 
express  any  positive  assurance,  or  certainty ;  as,  </  certo 
que  vem,  it  is  certain  that  he  comes ;  sei  que  estd  em  casa, 
I  know  he  is  at  home. 

From  these  observations  it  follows  that  all  the  verbs 
not  expressing  a  positive  assurance,  or  believing,  but  only 
denoting  ignorance,  doubt,  fear,  astonishment,  admiration, 
wishing,  praying,  pretension,  or  desire,  govern  the  subjunc- 
tive mood  after  que  :  as,  duvido  que  possa,  I  doubt  if  it  be 
in  his  power ;  temo  que  morra,  I  am  afraid  he  will  die ; 
admiro-me  que  consinta  n'isso,  I  wonder  he  agrees  to  it,  &c.; 
to  all  which  they  add  oxald,*  signifying  God  grant,  which 
is  used  in  Portuguese  before  all  the  tenses  of  the  optative 
or  conjunctive,  as  well  as  praza  a  Deus,  may  it  please 
God,  or  prouvera  a  Deus,  might  it  please  God. 

When  que  is  relative,  and  there  is  a  verb  in  the  im- 
perative or  in  the  indicative,  with  a  negative  or  interroga- 
tion before  it,  it  likewise  governs  the  subjunctive  :  as,  ndo 
ha  cousa  que  mais  me  inquiete,  there  is  nothing  that  dis- 
turbs me  more ;  ha  cousa  no  mundo  que  me  possa  dar  tanto 
gosto  ?  is  there  anything  in  the  world  that  could  give  me 
more  pleasure  1  allegai-lhe  tantas  razoens  que  o  possdo  per- 
*  An  Arabic  word  derived  from  Oh,  Allah ! 


174  SYNTAX  OF  VERBS. 

suadir,  give  him  so  many  reasons  that  he  may  be  per- 
suaded. 

The  present  subjunctive  is  sometimes  rendered  into 
English  by  the  second  preterimperfect  subjunctive,  when 
it  is  followed  by  a  verb  in  the  future  tense ;  as,  ainda  que 
eu  trabalhe,  nunca  hei  de  me  canpar,  though  I  should  work, 
I  never  should  be  tired. 

The  Portuguese  use  specially  the  same  present  sub- 
junctive for  the  future  ;  as  in  those  sentences  and  others, 
like  :- 

Ndo  duvido  que  venha,  I  do  not  doubt  but  he  will  come. 

Duvido  que  o  far.  a,  I  doubt  that,  or  whether  he  will 
do  it. 

Therefore  carefully  avoid  those  faults  which  foreigners 
are  so  apt  to  make,  in  considering  rather  the  tense  which 
they  want  to  turn  into  Portuguese,  than  the  mood  which 
the  genius  of  the  language  requires. 

The  present  indicative  is  also  used  for  the  future,  the 
same  as  in  English.  Example  :  jantais  hoje  em  casa  ?  do 
you  dine  at  home  to-day  1 

OF   THE    PARTICLES    GOVERNING    THE   OPTATIVE    OR 
SUBJUNCTIVE. 

The  conjunction  que,  that,  generally  requires  the  sub- 
junctive after  it ;  but  antes  que,  primeiro  que,  before  that, 
always  require  it. 

Que  makes  all  the  words  to  which  it  is  joined  become 
conjunctives;  as,  para  que,  to  the  end  that;  bem  que, 
ainda  que,  &c.  Posto  que,  although  ;  ate' que,  till  ;  quando, 
como  quer  que,  commonly  govern  the  subjunctive.  But 
com  que  assim  governs  the  indicative ;  as,  com  que  or  com 
que  assim  vird  amanhd,  so  he  will  come  to-morrow. 

In  Portuguese,  to  express  though  or  although,  if  it  is  by 


SYNTAX  OF  VERBS.  175 

ttinda  que,  you  may  put  either  the  subjunctive  or  indica- 
tive after  it.  Examples  :  ainda  que  seja  homem  honrado, 
though  he  is  an  honest  man ;  ainda  que  elle  faz  aquillo, 
though  he  does  that.  But  if  you  render  alt/tough  or 
though  by  ndo  obstante,  then  you  must  use  the  infinitive. 
Examples  :  though  he  is  an  honest  man,  nao  obstante  ser 
elle  homem  honrado ;  though  he  does  this,  ndo  obstante 
fazer  elle  isto. 

The  impersonal  verbs  generally  govern  the  subjunctive 
with  que  ;  but  with  this  distinction,  when  the  impersonal 
is  in  the  present  tense,  or  future,  of  the  indicative  mood, 
then  it  requires  the  present  subjunctive  mood  :  but  when 
the  impersonal,  or  any  other  verb  taken  impersonally,  is 
in  any  of  the  preterites  indicative,  then  it  governs  the 
imperfect,  perfect,  or  pluperfect  of  the  subjunctive, 
according  to  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  ;  as,  importa 
muito  que  el-rei  veja  tudo,  it  is  of  great  moment  that  the 
king  may  see  all ;  foi  conveniente  que  o  prindpe  fosse  com 
elle,  it  was  convenient  that  the  prince  should  go  with  him. 

The  present  subjunctive  is-  likewise  construed  when 
the  particle  por  is  separated  from  que  by  an  adjective ; 
as,  por  grande,  por  admiravel,  por  douto  que  seja,  though 
he  be  great,  admirable,  learned. 

An  imperative  often  requires  the  future  of  the  sub- 
junctive ;  as,  succeda  o  que  succeder,  or  seja  o  que  for, 
happen  what  may. 

The  imperfect  subjunctive  is  repeated  in  this  phrase, 
and  others,  like  succedesse,  o  que  succedesse,  happen  what 
may. 

The  future  of  the  subjunctive  mood  follows  generally 
these,  logo  que,  quando,  se,  como,  &c.  :  as,  logo  que  chegar 
iremos  a  passeiar,  as  soon  as  he  comes,  we  will  go  and 
take  a  walk ;  quando  vier  estaremos  promptost  when  he 
comes  we  shall  be  ready. 


176  SYNTAX  OF  VERBS. 

Observe,  that  quando  and  logo  que  may  also  be  con- 
strued with  the  indicative  mood :  as,  quando  el-rei  ve 
tudo  ndo  o  engando,  when  the  king  sees  everything,  he 
is  not  deceived ;  logo  que  chegou,  fallei  com  elle,  as  soon 
as  he  came,  I  spoke  with  him. 


OF    THE    INFINITIVE    MOOD. 

In  Portuguese  there  is  not  a  general  sign  before  the 
infinitive,  as  in  English  the  particle  to;  but  there  are 
several  particles  used  before  the  infinitive,  denoting  the 
same  as  to  does  in  English,  and  they  are  governed  by 
the  preceding  verbs  or  nouns.  These  particles  are  the 
following :  a,  para,  de,  com,  em,  por,  ate,  depois  de ;  and 
the  article  o,  when  the  infinitive  serves  as  a  nominative 
to  another  verb  ;  as,  o  dizer  e  o  fazer  sdo  duas  coisas, 
saying  and  doing  are  two  different  things. 

A  coming  between  two  verbs  denotes  the  second  as  the 
object  of  the  first :  as,  a  tardanca  das  nossas  esperanto s 
nos  ensina  a  modificar  os  nossos  dezejos,  the  delay  of  our 
hopes  teaches  us  to  modify  our  desires ;  elle  come^a  a 
discorrer,  he  begins  to  reason. 

Para  denotes  the  intention  or  usefulness ;  as,  a  ad- 
versidade  serve  para  experimentar  a  paciencia,  adversity 
serves  to  try  one's  patience.  Para  after  an  adjective 
denotes  its  object ;  as,  estd  prompto  para  obedecer,  he  is 
ready  to  obey. 

De  is  put  between  two  verbs,  if  the  first  governs  the 
genitive  or  ablative ;  and  when  the  substantive  or  adjec- 
tive governs  either  of  these  two  cases,  de  must  go  before 
the  following  verbs,  or  infinitive  :  as,  venho  de  ver  a  meu 
pai,  I  have  just  seen  my  father ;  e  tempo  de  hir-se,  it  is 
time  to  go  away ;  el-rei  foi  servido  de  mandar,  the  king 
has  been  pleased  to  order. 


SYNTAX  OF  PARTICIPLES  AND  GERUNDS.  177 

The  infinitive  is  on  several  occasions  governed  by 
prepositions  or  conjunctions ;  as,  sem  dizer  palavra, 
•without  speaking  a  word ;  where  you  may  observe  it 
is  expressed  in  English  by  the  participle  present :  as, 
nunca  se  can$a  de  jogar,  he  is  never  weary  of  playing ; 
diverte-se  em  cacsar,  he  delights  in  hunting ;  die  estd 
ddente  por  trabalhar  demasiado,  by  working  too  much  he 
is  sick ;  perde  o  sen  tempo  em  passeiar,  he  loses  his  time 
in  walking;  hei-de  ir-me  sem  me  despedir?  shall  I  go 
away  without  taking  my  leave  ? 

The  infinitive  is  also  used  passively ;  as,  ndo  Jut  que 
dizer ,  que  ver,  <fcc.,  there  is  nothing  to  be  said,  seen,  &c. 

The  gerund  of  any  verb  active  may  be  conjugated 
with  the  verb  estar,  to  be,  after  the  same  manner  as  in 
English  :  as,  estou  escrevendo,  I  am  writing ;  elle  estava 
dormindo,  he  was  asleep,  &c. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
OF  THE  SYNTAX  OF  PARTICIPLES  AND  GEEUNDS. 

THE  participle  in  the  Portuguese  language  generally 
ends  in  do  or  to  ;  as,  amado,  visto,  dito,  &c. 

The  active  participles  that  follow  the  verb  ter,  to 
have,  must  end  in  o  ;  as, 

Tenho  visto  el-rei,  I  have  seen  the  king. 
Tenho  visto  a  rainha,  I  have  seen  the  queen. 
Eu  tinJia  amado  os  livros,  I  had  loved  books. 
Eu  tinha  levado  as  cartas,  I  had  carried  the  letters. 

We  meet  with  authors  who  sometimes  make  the  parti- 

N 


178  SYNTAX  OF  PARTICIPLES  AND  GERUNDS. 

ciples  agree  with  the  thing  of  which  they  are  speaking  ; 
as,  in  Camoens,  canto  1,  stanza  xxix.  : 

E  porque  como  vistes,  tern  passados. 

Na  viagem  tdo  asperos  perigos, 

Tantos  climas  e  cfos  exprimentados,  &c. 

And  canto  2,  stanza  Ixxvi.  : 

Sao  offerecimentos  verdadeiros, 
E  palavras  sinceras  ndo  dobradas, 
As  que  o  rei  manda  aos  nobres  cavaleiros, 
Que  tanto  mar  e  terras  tern  passadas. 

If  it  be  a  neuter  verb,  the  participle  ought  always  to- 
end  in  o.  Example  : 

El-rei  tern  jantado,  the  king  has  dined ;  a  rainha  tern 
ceado,  the  queen  has  supped  ;  os  vossos  amigos  tern  ridot 
your  friends  have  laughed ;  minhas  irmds  tern  dormido, 
my  sisters  have  slept. 

When  the  active  participle  appears  to  precede  an  in- 
finitive, it  must  be  terminated  in  o  ;  as,  o  juiz  Ihe  tinha 
feito  cortar  a  cale^a,  the  judge  has  caused  his  head  to  be 
cut  off. 

The  passive  participles  which  are  joined  with  the 
tenses  of  the  verb  ser,  to  be,  agree  with  the  substantive 
that  precedes  the  verb  ser ;  as,  o  capitdo  foi  louvado, 
the  captain  was  praised ;  a  virtude  e  estimada,  virtue 
is  esteemed ;  os  preguicosos  sdo  censurados,  the  lazy  are 
blamed  ;  as  vossas  joias  fordo  vendidas,  your  jewels  were 
sold. 

The  Portuguese  generally  suppress  the  gerunds  having 
and  being  before  the  particles  :  as,  dito  isto,  having  said 
so ;  acabado  o  sermdo,  the  sermon  being  ended.  This 
manner  of  speaking  is  called  by  grammarians  the 
ablative  absolute. 

The  participle  of  the  present  tense  in  Portuguese  has 


PBEPOSITION8.  17 1) 

singular  and  plural,  but  one  termination  serves  for  both 
genders :  as,  um  homem  temente  a  Deus,  a  man  fearing 
God ;  uma  mulher  temente  a  Deus,  a  woman  fearing  God  ; 
homens  tementes  a  Deus,  a  people  fearing  God. 

There  are  many  participles  which  are  used  substan- 
tively  ;  as,  ignorante,  amante,  ouvinte,  estudante,  &c.,  an 
ignorant,  a  lover,  an  auditor  or  hearer,  a  scholar,  &c. 

It  is  better  to  place  the  nominative  after  the  gerund 
than  before  ;  as,  estando  el-rei  na  comedia,  the  king  being 
at  the  play. 


CHAPTER     VII. 
OF  PKEPOSITIONS. 

I.  A  PREPOSITION  is  a  part  of  speech  which  is  put 
before  nouns,  and  sometimes  before  verbs,  to  explain  sonic 
particular  circumstance. 

Prepositions  may  be  divided  into  separable  and  in- 
separable. An  inseparable  preposition  is  never  found 
but  in  compound  words,  and  signifies  nothing  of  itself. 
A  separable  preposition  is  generally  separated  from  other 
words,  and  signifies  something  of  itself. 

The  inseparable  prepositions  are  : 

Ab  and  abs ;  as,  abrogar,  to  abrogate;  abster-se,  to 
abstain. 

Arce,  or  archi;  as,  arcebispo,  an  archbishop;  archiduquey 
an  archduke. 

Ad  ;  as,  adventicio,  adventitious. 

Am;  as,  ambiguo,  ambiguous;  amparo,  protection, 
shelter. 


180  PREPOSITIONS. 

Circum  ;  as,  circumstancia,  circumstance. 

Co  ;  as  cohabitar,  to  live  together,  to  cohabit. 

Des  serves  to  express  the  contrary  of  the  word  it  is 
joined  to  ;  as,  desacerto,  mistake  ;  desfazer,  to  undo ;  desen- 
ganar,  to  undeceive,  are  the  contrary  of  acerto,  fazer,  and 
enganar. 

Dis  ;  as,  dispor,  to  dispose  ;  distinguir,  to  distinguish  ; 
distribuir,  to  distribute. 

Ex  ;  as,  extrahir,  to  extract. 

In  has  commonly  a  negative  or  privative  sense,  de- 
noting the  contrary  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  it  pre- 
cedes ;  as,  incapaz,  unable ;  infeliz,  unhappy ;  inac^ao, 
inaction,  <fec.  :  but  sometimes  it  is  affirmative,  as  in 
Latin. 

Observe  that  in  before  r  is  changed  into  ir  ;  as,  irre- 
gular, irregular ,  irracional,  irrational :  before  I  into  il  ; 
as  illegitimo,  illegitimate  :  before  m,  in  is  changed  into 
im  ;  as  immaterial,  immaterial. 

Ob  ;  as,  obviar,  to  obviate. 

Pos  ;  as,  pospor,  to  postpone. 

Pre ;  as,  preceder,  to  go  before ;  predecessor,  an  an- 
cestor. 

Pro  ;  as,  propor,  to  propose  ;  prometter,  to  promise. 

Re  is  a  particle  borrowed  from  the  Latin,  which  gene- 
rally denotes  iteration,  or  backward  action  :  as,  reedijicar, 
to  rebuild  ;  repercutir,  to  strike  back. 

So;  as  socorrer,  to  help,  to  succour. 

Sor ;  as  sorrir,  to  smile. 

Sos  ;  as,  soster,  to  support. 

Soto  ;  as,  sotopor,  to  put  or  lay  under. 

Sub  or  sob ;  as,  subalterno,  subaltern ;  subscrever,  to 
subscribe  ;  sobpena,  sobcolor,  &c. 

The  Arabic  article  al,  which  is  common  to  all  genders 
and  both  numbers,  is  found  in  the  beginning  of  almost 


PREPOSITIONS.  181 

all  the  words  that  remain  in  the  Portuguese  language 
from  the  Arabic,  and  it  is  the  surest  way  to  distinguish 
them.  But  the  Portuguese  articles  are  added  to  the 
Arabic  nouns,  without  taking  off  their  article,  al :  as, 
a  almofada,  the  cushion  ;  o  Alcorao,  the  Koran,  &c. 

The  Greek  preposition  anti  enters  into  the  composi- 
tion of  a  great  many  Portuguese  words,  which  cannot  be 
set  down  here.  It  is  enough  to  observe  that  it  signifies 
generally  opposite  ;  as  in  Antipodas,  Antipodes ;  antipapa, 
anti-pope.  And  sometimes  it  signifies  before  ;  as  in  anti- 
loquio,  a  preface,  introductory  remarks  ;  but  in  this  last 
sense  it  is  derived  from  the  Latin  preposition  ante. 


OF    SEPARABLE    PREPOSITIONS. 

II.  It  is  absolutely  impossible  ever  to  attain  to  the 
knowledge  of  any  language  whatever,  without  thoroughly 
understanding  the  various  relations  denoted  by  the  pre- 
positions, and  the  several  cases  of  nouns  which  they 
govern  ;  both  which  relations  and  cases  being  arbitrary, 
vary  and  differ  much  in  all  languages.  This  only  in- 
stance will  evince  it  :  the  English  say,  to  think  of  a  thing ; 
the  French,  to  think  to  a  thing  ;  the  Germans  and  Dutch, 
to  think  on  or  upon  a  thing ;  the  Spaniards  and  Portu- 
guese, to  think  in  a  thing,  &c.  Now,  it  will  avail  an 
Englishman  but  little  to  know  that  of  is  expressed  in 
Portuguese  by  de,  if  he  does  not  know  what  relations  em 
and  de  denote  in  the  language ;  since  the  Portuguese 
say,  to  think  in  a  think,  and  not  o/a  thing:  therefore  we 
will  treat  here  of  each  of  them,  and  of  their  construction 
separately. 

1st.  A,  or  rather  oto,  ds,  aos  (at,  in,  on,  &c.),  deno 
the  place  whither  one  is  going  ;  as, 


182  PREPOSITIONS. 

Eu  vou  a  Londres,  I  go  to  London. 

Voltar  a  Portugal,  to  return  or  go  to  Portugal. 

A,  in  this  sense,  is  a  preposition,  but  in  the  following 
observations  it  is  a  particle. 

2ndly.  A  denotes  time  :  as,  chegar  a  tempo,  to  arrive  in 
time  ;  a  todo  hora,  at  all  hours. 

3rdly.  A  denotes  the  mode  of  being  or  of  doing  of 
people ;  as  also  their  posture,  gesture,  or  action  :  as, 

Estar  d  sua  vontade,  to  be  at  one's  ease. 

A  direita,  on  the  right  hand  ;  d  esquerda,  on  the  left 
hand. 

Viver  d  sua  vontade  to  live  to  one's  mind,  as  one 
likes. 

Andar  a  pJ,  ou  a  cavallo,  to  go  on  foot  or  on  horse- 
back. 

Montar  a  cavdllo,  to  ride  on  horseback. 

Correr  d  redea  solta,  to  ride  full  speed. 

Trajar  d  Franceza,  to  dress  after  the  French  mode. 

Viver  d  Ingleza,  to  live  after  the  English  fashion. 

Andar  a  grandes  passos,  to  walk  at  a  great  rate. 

Andar  a  passos  lentos,  to  walk  very  slowly. 

4thly.  A  denotes  the  price  of  things ;  as,  a  oito  xelins 
at  eight  shillings.  It  denotes  also  the  weight :  but  as 
the  nouns  signifying  weight  are  generally  used  in  the 
plural  number,  s  is  added  to  a,  when  it  is  placed  before 
nouns  of  the  feminine  gender,  and  os  when  it  precedes 
nouns  of  the  masculine  gender :  thus,  ds  onqas,  by  the 
ounce ;  aos  arrateis,  by  the  pound,  &c.  A  denotes  also 
the  measure  :  as,  medir  a  palmos,  to  span  or  measure  by 
the  hand  extended. 

When  a  is  preceded  by  d'aqui,  and  followed  by  a  noun 
of  time,  it  denotes  the  space  of  time  after  which  some- 
thing is  to  be  done  ;  as,  el-rei  partird  d'aqui  a  tres  dias. 
the  king  will  set  out  three  days  hence. 


PREPOSITIONS.  1 83 

5thly.  A  denotes  the  tools  used  in  working,  as  likewise 
the  games  one  plays  at :  as,  abrir  ao  buril,  to  grave : 
where  o  is  added  to  a;  trdbalhar  d  candea,to  do  anything 
by  candle-light ;  d  agulha,  with  the  needle. 

Andar  d  vela,  to  sail  or  to  be  under  sail. 

Jogar  a  pella,  to  play  at  tennis. 

Jogar  as  cartas,  to  play  at  cards ;  here  s  is  added  to  a; 
the  noun  being  of  the  feminine  gender  and  plural  number. 

Jogar  aos  centos,  to  play  at  piquet ;  here  os  is  added  to 
a,  as  preceding  a  noun  signifying  a  game,  of  the  mascu- 
line gender  and  plural  number. 

Gthly.  A  signifies  sometimes  as.  Example  :  estd  isto 
a  sen  gosto  ?  is  this  as  you  like  it  1  And  sometimes  it 
signifies  after :  as,  a  sen  modo,  after  his  or  her  way.  It 
signifies  also  in;  as,  ao  principio,  in  the  beginning ;  but 
then  o  is  added  to  it. 

Tthly.  A  is  also  put  before  infinitives,  preceded  by 
another  verb ;  as,  ensinar  a  cantor,  to  teach  to  sing.  It 
is  also  placed  between  two  equal  numbers,  to  denote 
order ;  as,  dois  a  dois,  two  by  two  ;  quatro  a  quatro,  four 
by  four  :  and  sometimes  it  is  preceded  by  a  participle  or 
adjective,  and  followed  by  an  infinitive  mood. 

8thly.  A  is  a  particle  of  composition,  with  many  nouns, 
verbs,  and  adverbs,  of  which  it  often  increases  the  mean- 
ing ;  as,  adinheirado,  very  rich,  that  has  a  great  deal  of 
money :  but  it  generally  expresses  in  verbs  the  action  of 
the  nouns  they  are  composed  of;  as,  ajoelhar,  to  kneel 
down,  which  is  formed  from  a  and  joelho,  knee ;  abrandar, 
to  appease ;  alargar,  to  enlarge  ;  from  brando,  soft ;  largo, 
wide,  <kc. 

9thly.  A,  when  it  is  preceded  by  the  verb  ser,  and 
followed  by  the  personal  pronouns,  signifies  in  the  stead 
of ;  as,  se  eu  fosse  a  vos,  faria  aquillo,  if  I  were  you  (in 
your  place),  1  would  do  that. 


184  PREPOSITIONS. 

lOthly.  When  a  is  placed  before  casa,  and  the  sense 
implies  going  to,  it  is  rendered  into  English  by  to,  but  the 
word  casa  is  left  out ;  as,  elle  foi  d  casa  do  governador,  he 
went  to  the  governor's.  You  must  observe  that  a  in  this, 
sense  is  a  preposition. 

llthly.  Ao  pe  signifies  near  ;  as,  ponde  um  ao  pe  do- 
outro,  place,  put,  or  set  them  near  one  another.  Some- 
times mesmo  comes  before  ao  pe,  to  express  still  more  the 
nearness  of  a  thing,  and  mesmo  ao  pe  is  rendered  into- 
English  by  hard  by,  just  by,  &c.;  as,  a  sua  casa  estd  mesmo- 
ao  pe  da  minha,  his  house  is  just  by  mine. 

12thly.  When  the  noun  respeito  is  preceded  by  a  it  is 
used  in  the  same  sense  as  em  comparacdo,  but  requires  one 
of  these  particles,  do,  da,  dos,  das,  after  it,  and  signifies  in 
comparison  of,  in  regard  to,  in  respect  of ;  as,  isto  e  nada 
a  respeito  do  que  posso  dizer,  this  is  nothing  to  other  things 
that  I  can  say. 

13thly.  When  a  comes  before  a  neuter  verb,  it  marks 
a  dative ;  and  after  an  active  verb,  an  accusative  case. 

A  before  the  word  proposito  is  used  in  familiar  dis- 
course ;  as,  a  proposito,  esquecime  de  dizer-vos  o  outro  dia, 
now  I  think  of  it,  I  forgot  to  tell  you  the  other  day. 

14thly.  Ao  revez,  or  ds  avessas,  are  also  used  as  pre- 
positions, attended  by  de,  do,  da,  &c.,  and  it  signifies 
quite  the  reverse,  or  contrary  ;  as,  elle  faz  tudo  ao  revez,  or 
ds  avessas,  do  que  houvera  de  ser,  ou  do  que  the  dizem,  he 
does  everything  quite  the  reverse  of  right,  or  contrary  to 
what  he  is  bid. 

ISthly.  A  before  troco  signifies  provided  that.  It  is 
also  used  before  the  word  tiro  ;  as,  a  tiro  de  pe$a,  within 
cannon-shot. 

1  Gthly.  Cara  a  cara,  corpo  a  corpo,  signify  face  to  face,, 
body  to  body.  Tomar  uma  couza  a  boa  ou  a  md  parte, 
signifies  to  take  a  thing  well  or  ill. 


PREPOSITIONS.  185 

Such  are  the  chief  relations  denoted  by  the  particle  a, 
The  others  must  be  learned  in  construing  and  reading 
good  Portuguese  books. 

1st.  De,  or  rather  do,  da,  dos,  das  (of,  from,  &c.)  denote, 
first,  the  place  one  comes  from  :  as,  sahir  de  Londres,  to 
go  out  of  London  ;  vir  de  Franca,  das  Indias,  &c.,  to  come 
from  France,  from  the  Indies,  &c. 

2nd.  De  between  two  nouns  denotes  the  quality  of 
the  person  expressed  by  the  first  noun  ;  as,  um  homem  de 
honra,  a  man  of  honour  :  or  the  matter  which  the  thing  of 
the  first  noun  is  made  of;  as, 

Uma  estatua  de  marmore,  a  statue  of  marble. 

Uma  ponte  de  madeira  ou  de  pedra,  a  wood  or  stone 
bridge. 

Observe,  that  two  nouns  so  joined  with  de  are  com- 
monly rendered  into  English  by  two  nouns  likewise,  but 
without  a  preposition,  or  rather  by  a  compound  word, 
whose  first  noun  (whether  substantive  or  adjective) 
expresses  the  matter  and  quality,  manner,  form,  and  use 
of  the  other  :  as,  a  stone  bridge,  uma  ponte  de  pedra  ;  a 
dancing-master,  um  mestre  de  dan$a. 

3rd.  De,  do,  da,  dos,  das,  are  used  after  the  participles 
of  the  preterite,  with  ser  ;  as,  ser  amado,  ou  bem  visto  do 
povo,  dos  sabios,  &c.,  to  be  loved  by  the  people,  by  the 
learned,  &c. 

Do  serves  for  the  masculine,  da  for  the  feminine,  and 
de  for  both. 

4th.  De  sometimes  signifies  by  ;  as,  de  noite,  by  night ; 
de  dia,  by  day. 

5th.  De  before  em  and  many  nouns  of  time  denotes 
the  regular  interval  of  the  time  after  which  something 
begins  again ;  as,  eu  vou  vel-o  de  dois  em  dois  dias,  I  go  to 
see  him  every  other  day  :  and  before  nouns  of  place  and 
adverbs  repeated  with  em  or  para  between,  de  denotes  the 


186  PREPOSITIONS. 

passing  from  one  place  or  condition  to  another ;  as,  correr 
de  rua  em  rua,  to  run  from  street  to  street ;  de  mal  par< 
peor,  from  bad  to  worse. 

6th.  De  after  some  verbs  signifies  after  or  in  ;  as, 
die  portou-se  d'esta  sorte,  he  behaved  in  or  after  this 
manner. 

7th.  De  is  used  before  an  infinitive,  and  is  then 
governed  by  some  preceding  noun  and  verb  :  as,  capaz  de 
ensinar,  capable  of  teaching ;  digno  de  ser  amado,  worthy 
to  be  loved,  &c.  ;  procurar  de  fazer,  to  endeavour  to  do ; 
authoridade  de  pregar,  the  power  or  authority  of  preach- 
ing, &c. 

8th.  De  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  on  ; 
as,  pdr-se  de  joelhos,  to  kneel  down  on  one's  knees. 

9th.  De  between  two  nouns  denotes  the  use  which  a 
thing  is  designed  for  :  as,  azeite  de  candea,  lamp-oil ;  arma 
defogo,  a  fire-arm ;  moinko  de  vento,  a  windmill. 

This  relation  is  expressed  in  English  by  two  nouns, 
making  a  compound  word  ;  the  first  of  which  signifies  the 
manner,  form,  and  use,  denoted  by  the  Portuguese  pre- 
position :  as,  cadeira  de  bra^os,  an  arm-chair  or  elbow- 
chair  ;  vela  de  cera,  a  wax-candle,  &c. 

I0th.  De  denotes  sometimes  the  qualities  of  things  ; 
as,  meias  de  tres  fios,  stockings  with  three  threads.  Some- 
times it  denotes  also  the  price  ;  as,  panno  de  dezoito  xelins, 
eighteen-shilling  cloth. 

llth.  De  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  upon  ; 
as,  viver  or  sustentar-se  de  peixe,  to  live  upon  fish.  Some- 
times it  is  rendered  into  English  by  with;  as,  morrer  de 
frio,  to  starve  with  cold. 

12th.  De  sometimes  signifies  for  or  out  of;  as,  saltar 
de  alegria,  to  leap  for  joy ;  de  modesto,  out  of  modesty. 

13th.  De  signifies  sometimes  at ;  as,  zombar  de  alguemt 
laugh  at  one. 


PREPOSITIONS.  187 

14th.  De  is  sometimes  left  out  in  English;  as,  gozar 
de  uma  cousa,  to  enjoy  a  thing. 

15th.  De,  followed  by  two  nouns  of  number  and  the 
preposition  ate  between  them,  is  rendered  into  English  by 
between  ;  as,  um  homem  de  quarenta  at£  cincoenta  annos,  a 
man  between  forty  and  fifty. 

16th.  De,  preceded  by  the  preposition  diante,  is  left 
out  in  English  :  as,  diante  de  mim,  before  me  ;  diante  de 
Deus,  before  God. 

17th.  De,  when  it  is  placed  before  casa,  and  the  sense 
implies  coming  from,  is  rendered  into  English  by  from  ; 
but  the  word  casa  sometimes  is  left  out  in  English,  and 
sometimes  not ;  as,  venho  de  casa  (meaning  my  house),  I 
come  from  home,  from  my  house  :  but  venho  da  casa  da 
Senhora  C.  must  be  rendered  into  English  thus,  /  come 
from  Mrs.  C.'s. 

Finally,  de  is  used  before  several  words :  as,  de  bru^os, 
lying  all  along  on  the  ground  ;  de  madrugada,  early  in  the 
morning ;  de  veras,  in  earnest,  seriously ;  de  verdo,  in 
summer ;  homem  de  palavra,  a  man  as  good  as  his  word  ; 
de  costas,  backwards,  or  on  one's  back ;  andar  de  pe*,  to  be 
sickly  without  being  bed-ridden  ;  and  many  others  which 
must  be  learned  by  use. 

ANTES. 

III.  Antes,  before,  shows  a  relation  of  time,  of  which 
it  denotes  priority  ;  and  is  always  opposite  to  depois,  after ; 
as,  antes  da  crea^ao  do  mundo,  before  the  creation  of  the 
world. 

Primeiro  is  also  used  as  a  preposition ;  as,  elle  chegou 
primeiro  que  eu,  he  arrived  here  before  me. 

DIANTE. 

IV.  Diante,  before,  shows  a  relation  of  place,  and  it  is 
always  opposite  to  dett-az,  behind.     It  signifies  also  some- 


188  PREPOSITIONS. 

times  em  or  net  presenca  :  as,  ha  arvores  diante  de  sua  ca<s 
there  are  trees  before  his  house ;  ponde  aquillo  diante  do 
fogo,  set  or  put  that  before  the  fire ;  pregar  diante  d'el-rei, 
to  preach  before  the  king. 

Diante  is  also  sometimes  an  adverb,  and  may  be  used 
instead  of  adiante  ;  as,  ir  diante,  or  adiante,  to  go  before  ; 
but  in  the  following  phrase  you  must  say,  nao  vades  tao 
adiante,  and  not  diante,  do  not  go  so  far  ]  por  diante  is  to 
be  rendered  into  English  by  on  in  the  following  phrase, 
ide  por  diante,  go  on. 

DEPOIS. 

V.  Depois,  after,  denotes  posteriority  of  time,  and  it> 
used  in  opposition  to  antes  :  as,  depois  do  diluvio,  after  the 
deluge ;  depois  do  meio  dia,  afternoon. 

Depois  is  also  used  with  an  infinitive  ;  as,  feito  aquillo, 
or  tendo  feito  aquillo,  or  depois  de  fazer  aquillo,  after  hav- 
ing done  that :  and  it  is  also  made  a  conjunction  with  que, 
governing  the  indicative ;  as,  depois  que  teve  feito  aquillo, 
after  he  had  done  that. 

DETRAZ. 

VI.  Detraz,  behind,  denotes  posteriority  both  of  place1 
and  order,  and  it  is  said  in  opposition  to  diante :  as,  a  sua 
casa  estd  detraz  da  vossa,  his  house  is  behind  yours ;  elle 
vinha  detraz  de  mim,  he  walked  after  me. 

EM. 

VII.  Em,  or  no,  na,  nos,  nas  (in,  into,   within,   itc.)y 
denote  a  relation  both  of  time  and  place.     The  many 
various  significations  in  which  these  prepositions  are  used 
must  be  accurately  observed,  and  much  regard  had  to 
them  in  practice. 

No  and  na  are  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by 
a  ;  as,  duas  vezes  no  dia,  na  semana,  &c.,  twice  a-day, 
week,  &c. 


PREPOSITIONS.  189 

No,  na,  &c.,  are  always  used  before  nouns  denoting 
the  place  wherein  something  is  kept  j  as,  estd  no  gabinete, 
it  is  in  the  closet ;  na  papeleira,  in  the  bureau ;  nas  gavetas, 
in  the  drawers ;  na  rua,  in  the  street,  &c. ;  but  sometimes 
they  are  rendered  into  English  by  upon  ;  as,  cahir  no  chao, 
to  fall  upon  the  ground. 

Em,  no,  na,  &c.,  signify  commonly  in  ;  as,  em  Londres, 
in  London;  estd  na  graqa  d'el-rei,  he  is  in  favour  with  the 
king  :  but  in  some  cases  it  has  a  very  particular  meaning ; 
as,  estar  em  corpo,  which  signifies  literally  to  be  in  body, 
but  the  true  sense  of  it  is  to  be.  without  a  cloak,  so  that  the 
body  is  more  exposed  to  view  without  an  upper  garment. 
Estar  em  pernas,  litterally  to  be  in  legs,  signifies  to  be  bare 
legged  ;  that  is,  the  legs  exposed  without  stockings.  Estar 
sm  camisa  is  said  of  one  that  has  only  the  shirt  on  his 
back. 

When  this  preposition  em  is  before  an  infinitive,  then 
it  is  an  English  gerund ;  as,  consiste  em  foliar  bem,  it  con- 
sists in  speaking  well :  but  when  it  is  found  before  a 
gerund,  it  signifies  as  soon  as ;  as,  em  acabando  irei,  as 
soon  as  I  have  done,  I  will  go. 

Nos  nossos  tempos  is  rendered  into  English  by  now-a- 
days. 

Em  is  used  in  sentences  that  imply  a  general  sense  ; 
us,  elle  estd  em  miseravel  estado,  he  is  in  a  wretched  condi- 
tion ;  and  not,  no  miseravel :  but  if  the  sentence  implies 
a  particular  sense,  you  must  make  use  of  no,  na,  &c.;  as, 
no  miseravel  estado  em  que  elle  estd,  in  the  wretched  con- 
dition wherein  he  is ;  and  not  em  miseravel.  You  must 
observe  in  this  last  example  and  the  like,  that  em  is  to  be 
used  before  que,  and  not  no,  na,  &c.,  which  are  to  be 
placed  only  before  qual :  therefore  you  must  not  say,  no 
miseravel  estado  no  que  elle  estd  ;  but  no  miseravel  estado  no 
elle  estd. 


190  PREPOSITIONS. 

Em,  construed  with  pronouns  without  an  article, 
makes  a  sort  of  adverb,  rendered  into  English  by  a  pre- 
position and  a  noun  ;  thus,  in  this  sentence,  nos  iremos  em 
coche,  we  shall  go  in  a  coach,  em  cache  is  an  adverb  of 
manner,  which  shows  how  we  shall  go ;  but  no  coche 
denotes  something  besides  :  as,  if  a  company  were  con- 
sidering how  they  shall  ride  to  a  place,  somebody  would 
say,  v6s  ireis  na  cadeirinha,  e  nos  no  coche,  you  shall  go  in 
a  chair,  and  we  in  a  coach ;  no  coche  would  be  said  in 
opposition  to  na  cadeirinha,  and  both  respectively  to  some 
specified  chair  and  coach ;  or  else  they  should  say,  vos 
ireis  em  cadeirinha,  e  nos  em  coche.  But  in  this  other  sen- 
tence, eu  deixei  o  men  chapeo  no  coche,  I  left  my  hat  in  the 
coach,  it  would  be  improper  to  say  em  coche,  because  some 
particular  coach  is  meant,  and  that  which  has  driven  me 
here  or  there,  or  which  has  been  spoken  of. 

We  say  de  verdo,  no  verao,  or  em  o  verao  ;  de  inverno, 
no  inverno,  &c.,  in  summer,  in  winter,  &c. 

Em  is  also  rendered  into  English  by  at ;  as,  em  todo 
tempo,  at  all  times. 

Em  is  used,  and  never  no,  na,  &c.,  before  proper  names 
of  cities  and  authors  :  as,  elle  estd  em  Londres,  he  is  in 
London ;  nos  lemos  em  Cicero,  we  read  in  Cicero.  But 
they  say,  no  Porto,  in  Oporto. 

Em,  and  no,  na,  &c.,  are  construed  with  the  names 
of  kingdoms  ;  as,  em  or  na  Inglaterra,  in  England : 
but  no,  na,  is  most  commonly  construed  with  names  of 
provinces;  as,  no  Alentejo,  na  Beira,  &c.,  in  Alentejo,  in 
Beira,  &c. 

Em  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  into  ;  as, 
Narciso  foi  transformado  em  flor,  Narcissus  was  meta- 
morphosed into  a  flower  :  and  sometimes  by  to  ;  as,  de 
rua  em  rua,  from  street  to  street. 

No,    na,    are   sometimes    rendered    into    English  by 


PREPOSITIONS.  191 

against ;  as,  dor  com  a  cabeca  na  parede,  to  dash  one's 
head  against  the  wall. 

No,  na,  &c.j  are  also  rendered  into  English  by  in,  and 
sometimes  by  into  ;  as,  ter  um  menino  nos  bracos,  to  hold 
a  child  in  one's  arms ;  entregar  alguma  coisa  nas  moos  de 
alguem,  to  deliver  a  thing  into  somebody's  hands. 

Em  is  used  before  the  word  travez ;  as  in  this  phrase, 
por-se  de  mal  em  travez  com  alguem,  to  fall  out  together. 

Em,  before  a  noun  of  time,  denotes  the  space  of  time 
that  elapses  in  doing  something ;  as,  el-rei  foi  a  Hanover 
em  tres  dias,  the  king  went  to  Hanover  in  three  days 
that  is,  he  was  no  longer  than  three  days  in  going. 

Em  is  sometimes  used  after  the  verb  hir,  to  go ;  as, 
vai  em  graca  de  Deus,  he  goes  with  the  blessing  of  God. 

Em  before  quanta,  and  sometimes  without  it,  is  ren- 
dered into  English  by  while  or  whilst ;  as,  em  quanta  vos 
fazeis  aquillo,  eu  farei  isto,  while  you  do  that,  I  shall  do 
this  :  but  if  they  are  followed  by  a  noun  of  time  with  an 
interrogation,  then  they  must  be  rendered  into  English 
by  in  how  much,  or  many  ;  as,  em  quanto  tempo  ?  in  how 
much  time  ?  Observe,  that  em  quanto  a  mim,  a  ti,  a  elle, 
&c.,  are  rendered  into  English  by  for  what  concerns  me, 
thee,  him,  &c. 

No  serves  for  the  masculine,  na  for  the  feminine,  and 
em  for  both. 

Em  signifies  as  /  as,  em  sinal  da  sua  amizadet  as  a 
token  of  his  friendship  ;  em  premio,  as  a  reward. 

The  prepositions  em,  no,  na,  &c.,  and  dentro,  have  very 
often  the  same  signification,  therefore  they  may  some- 
times be  used  one  instead  of  the  other :  as,  estd  na  gaveta, 
or  dentro  da  gaveta,  it  is  in  the  drawer  ;  estd  na  cidade,  or 
dentro  da  cidade,  he  is  in  town. 

Em  before  the  words  favor,  utilidade,  consideracdo, 
razao,  and  the  like,  signifies  in  behalf  of,  on  account  of, 


192  PREPOSITIONS. 

•&c.,  as,  em  razdo  das  bellas  acqoens  que  etle  tern  feito,  in 
•consideration  of  the  great  things  he  has  performed. 

Observe,  that  they  very  often  make  an  elision  of  the 
last  vowels,  o,  a,  of  the  preposition  no,  na,  where  there  is 
a  vowel  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  word ;  as,  n'  agoa, 
instead  of  na  agoa :  they  also  cut  off  the  e  of  the  prepo- 
sition em,  and  change  the  m  into  n,  as  you  may  see  in 
Camoens,  canto  2,  stanza  xxxii.,  n'algum  porto,  instead  of 
fm  algum  porto,  wherein  you  must  observe  that  rC  is  to  be 
rendered  into  English  by  to  or  into. 


COM. 

VII.  This  preposition  signifies  with,  and  it  denotes 
conjunction,  union,  mixing,  assembling,  keeping  company: 
as,  casar  uma  donzella  com  um  homem  honrado,  to  marry  a 
maid  with  an  honest  man ;  hir  com  alguem,  to  go  with 
some  one ;  com  a  ajuda  de  Dem,  by  God's  help,  &c. 

Observe,  that  most  of  the  adverbs  formed  of  the 
adjectives  are  turned  into  Portuguese  by  the  preposition 
com  and  the  substantive  :  as,  atrevidamente,  boldly ;  com 
atrevimento,  with  boldness  ;  elegantemente,  elegantly ;  com 
elegancia,  with  elegance  ;  cortezmente,  politely ;  com  cortezia, 
with  politeness,  &c. 

The  last  consonant,  m,  is  very  often  cut  off,  even 
before  the  noun  of  number,  um,  one  ;  and  so  they  say 
c'um,  instead  of  com  um,  as  may  be  seen  in  Camoens,  canto 
2,  stanza  xxxvii. 

With  me,  with  tliee,  with  himself,  &c.,  are  rendered  into 
Portuguese  by  commigo,  comtigo  or  comvosco,  comsiyo,  com 
nosco,  comvosco,  comsigo. 

When  com  is  preceded  by  para,  it  signifies  towards, 
and  sometimes  over  in  English  :  as,  sejamos  piedosos  para 
com  os  pobres,  let  us  be  merciful  towards  the  poor ;  ter 


PREPOSITIONS.  193 

grande  poder  para  com  alguem,  to  have  great  influence  over 
somebody's  mind. 

Com  before  the  word  capa  is  used  metaphorically,  and 
then  it  signifies  under  colour,  or  pretext. 

PARA. 

VIII.  Para  is  rendered  into  English  by  for ;  but  it 
signifies  also  to,  when  it  is  found  before  the  infinitive, 
and  denotes  the  intention,  or  purpose  in  doing  something  : 
as,  este  livro  e  para  men  irmdo,  this  book  is  for  my  brother; 
esta  penna  e  para  escrever,  this  pen  is  to  write ;  Deus  nos 
fez  para  amal-o,  God  made  us  for  to  love  him ;  o  comer  e 
necessario  para  conservar  a  vida,  eating  is  necessary  for 
preserving  life. 

Para  que  is  rendered  into  English  by  for  what ;  as, 
para  que  e  isto  ?  for  what  is  this  1  and  sometimes  by  that, 
or  in  order  that ;  as,  para  que  venha  ver-me,  that  he  may 
come  and  see  me.  But  porque  signifies  why,  for  what, 
upon  what  account ;  as,  porque  ndo  vindes  ?  why  do  you  not 
come  ?  but  when  it  is  not  followed  by  an  interrogation,  it 
signifies  because. 

Para  serves  likewise  before  the  verbs,  to  denote  what 
one  is  able  to  do  in  consequence  of  his  present  disposition : 
as,  die  4  bastante  forte  para  andar  a  cavallo,  he  is  strong 
enough  to  ride  ;  elle  tem  bastante  cabedal  para  sustentar-se, 
he  has  means  enough  to  maintain  himself ;  a  occasido  e 
muito  favoravel  para  nos  ndo  servirmos  della,  the  occasion 
is  too  favourable  to  let  it  slip. 

Para  expresses  also  the  capacity  or  incapacity  of  doing 
anything  :  as,  elle  4  homem  para  tudo,  he  is  a  man  fit  for 
anything ;  e  homem  para  pouco,  he  is  good  for  little ;  e 
homem  para  nada,  he  is  good  for  nothing. 

This  preposition  is  also  used  to  denote  the  end  or 

o 


194  PREPOSITIONS. 

motive  of  doing  anything :  as,  trdbalho  para  o  bem  publico, 
I  work  for  the  public  good ;  um  hospital  para  os  pobres, 
an  hospital  for  the  poor. 

Para  is  a  preposition  of  time :  as,  isto  me  basta  para 
todo  o  anno,  this  is  sufficient  for  me  for  all  the  year  ;  estao 
unidos  para  sempre,  they  are  united  for  ever  ;  para  dois 
meses  era  muito  pouco,  for  two  months  it  was  too  little. 

Para  is  sometimes  preceded  by  the  adverb  Id,  and 
followed  by  a  noun  of  time,  and  then  it  is  rendered  into 
English  by  against  or  towards ;  as,  Id  para  o  Jim  da 
semana,  against  the  end  of  the  week,  or  towards  the  end 
of  the  week. 

Para  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  consider- 
ing, or  with  respect  to  :  as,  este  menino  estd  muito  adiantado 
para  o  idade  que  tern,  or  para  o  pouco  tempo  que  estuda, 
this  child  is  very  forward  for  his  age,  or  considering  the 
little  time  he  has  learned  ;  para  ser  Inglez  falla  muito 
bem,  he  speaks  very  well  considering  that  he  is  an  English- 
man. 

Para  signifies  sometimes  just  or  ready  to;  as,  elle 
estd  para  partir,  he  is  just  going  away,  he  is  ready  to  go. 

Para  is  also  used  before  the  word  gramas :  as,  elle  ndo 
e  para  gramas,  he  takes  no  jest ;  elle  ndo  estd  para  gramas, 
:he  is  out  of  humour,  or  he  is  in  an  ill-humour. 

Para  onde  ?  signifies  whither  ?  to  what  place  ? 

Para  que  ?  or  para  que  Jim  ?  signifies  to  what  end  or 
purpose  ?  Para  cima  signifies  upward. 

Para  uma  e  outra  parte  signifies  to  both  sides,  places,  or 
parts. 

Para  is  also  rendered  into  English  by  towards,  and  is 
said  of  places ;  as,  para  o  oriente,  towards  or  to  the  east. 

Para  onde  quer  que  signifies  whither  or  to  what  place 
thou  wilt,  anywhere. 

Para  outra  parte  signifies  towards  another  place. 


PREPOSITIONS.  195 

Para  commigo,  towards  me. 

Para  o  diante  signifies  for  the  time  to  come. 

De  mim,  para  mint,  signifies  for  what  concerns  me. 

Para  is  used  by  Camoens,  canto  2,  stanza  xxiv.,  before 
the  preposition  dttraz,  and  signifies  backwards. 

Para  between  two  nouns  of  number  is  rendered  into 
English  by  or,  and  sometimes  by  and  :  as,  um  homem  de 
quarenta  para  cincoenta  annos,  a  man  between  forty  and 
fifty  ;  dista  de  quatro  para  cinco  legoas,  it  is  about  four  or 
five  leagues  distant. 

FOR. 

IX.  Por,  pelo,  pela,  pelos,  or  pelas,  signifies  for  :  as, 
por  amor  de  v6s,  for  your  sake ;  por  seis  semanas,  for  six 
weeks ;  palavra  por  palavra,  word  for  word. 

Polo  and  pola,  instead  of  pelo  and  pela,  are  out  of  use. 

Por  sometimes  denotes  that  the  thing  is  not  yet  done  : 
as,  esta  obra  estd  por  acabar,  this  work  is  not  yet  done. 

Por,  by,  for,  over,  through  :  as,  alcancei-o  por  empenko, 
I  obtained  it  by  protection ;  eu  vou  por  dinheiro,  I  am 
going  for  money ;  passeio  pelos  campos,  I  walk  through  the 
fields ;  por  tudo  o  reino,  all  over  the  kingdom. 

When  por  is  before  an  infinitive,  and  followed  by  a 
negative,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sentence,  it  is  rendered 
into  English  by  although  or  though  :  as,  por  ser  devota,  or 
por  devota  que  seja,  nao  deixa  de  ser  mulher,  though  she  is 
a  religious  woman,  yet  she  is  a  woman ;  por  ser  pobre,  or 
por  pobre  que  seja,  nao  deixa  de  ser  soberba,  though  she  has 
no  fortune,  she  is  nevertheless,  or  for  all  that,  proud. 
Here  the  negative  together  with  the  verb  deixar  are  ren- 
dered into  English  by  the  verb  to  be,  and  the  particles 
nevertheless,  yet,  &c.  Sometimes  the  words  nem  por  isso 
are  used  before  the  verb  deixar p,  but  the  sense  is  the  same. 


196  PREPOSITIONS. 

For  followed  by  an  adjective  and  the  particle  que,  with 
a  verb  in  the  subjunctive  mood,  is  rendered  into  English 
by  ever  so  :  as,  por  grande  que  elle  seja,  let  him  be  ever  so 
great ;  por  pouco  que  seja,  ever  so  little. 

Por  before  menos  signifies  far  less  than,  or  under  ;  as, 
vmce  ndo  o  terd  por  menos  de  vinte  libras,  you  shall  not 
have  it  under  twenty  pounds. 

Por  before  quanto,  with  an  interrogation,  signifies,  for 
how  much,  at  what  rate  ?  But  if  there  be  no  interrogation, 
as  in  the  following  and  the  like  sentences,  then  it  is  to  be 
rendered  into  English  by  for  ever  so  much;  as,  ndo  of  aria 
por  quanto  me  dessem,  I  would  not  do  it  for  ever  so  much. 

Por  before  cima  signifies  upwards,  and  before  baixo  is 
rendered  into  English  by  downwards  ;  as,  o  remedio  obra 
por  cima  e  por  baixo,  the  medicine  operates,  or  works,  up- 
wards and  downwards. 

Por  before  pouco,  muito,  bem,  &c.,  and  followed  by  quet 
makes  a  sort  of  conjunction  governing  the  subjunctive, 
and  is  rendered  into  English  by  if,  followed  by  ever  or  ever 
so  little,  much,  well,  &c.,  as,  por  pouco  que  erreis,  if  you  do 
amiss  ever  so  little  ;  por  bem  que  eu  faca,  if  I  do  ever  so 
well,  &c. 

Por  before  mim  signifies  sometimes  as  for  or  for  my 
part :  as,  por  mim  estou  prompto,  as  for  me,  or  for  my  part, 
I  am  ready  ;  por  mim  podeis  dormir  se  quizerdes,  as  for  me, 
you  may  sleep. 

Por,  pelo,  pela,  &c.,  denote  the  efficient  cause  of  a 
thing,  as  also  the  motive  and  means,  or  ways  of  doing  it ; 
in  all  which  significations  they  are  rendered  into  English 
by  by,  through,  out  of,  at,  &c.;  as, 

A  Asia  foi  conquistada  por  Alexandre,  Asia  was  con- 
quered by  Alexander. 

V6s  fallais  d  'isso  s6  por  inveja,  it  is  out  of  envy  only 
you  speak  of  it. 


PREPOSITIONS.  197 

Elle  entrou  pela  porta,  mas  sahio  pela  janella,  he  got  in 
at  the  door,  but  he  got  out  at  the  window,  <fec. 

Por  denotes  place,  after  the  verbs  ir  and  passar ;  as, 
por  onde  ireis  v6s  ?  which  way  shall  you  go  ? 

Eupassarei  por  Franqa,  I  will  go  through  France  ;  por 
onde  passou  elle  ?  which  way  did  he  go  ? 

Por  construed  with  nouns  without  an  article,  denotes 
most  times  distribution  of  people,  time,  and  place  ;  and  it  is 
rendered  into  English  by  a,  or  every,  before  the  noun  :  as, 

Elle  deu  tanto  por  cabeca,  he  gave  so  much  a-head. 

Tanto  por  soldado,  por  anno,  por  mez,  por  semana,  &c., 
so  much  a-soldier,  a-year,  a-month,  a-week ;  a  razdo  de 
vinte  por  cento,  at  the  rate  of  twenty  per  cent. 

Elle  pede  tanto  por  legoa,  he  asks  so  much  a  league,  or 
every  league. 

Por  between  two  nouns  without  an  article,  or  between 
two  infinitives  without  a  preposition,  denotes  the  choice 
which  one  makes  between  two  things,  alike  in  their 
nature,  but  different  in  their  circumstances ;  as, 

Casa  por  casa  antes  quero  esta  que  aquella,  since  I  must 
have  one  of  these  two  houses,  I  like  this  better  than  that ; 
morrer  por  morrer,  melhor  e"  morrer  combatendo  que  fugindo, 
when  a  man  must  die  it  is  better  to  die  fighting  than  run- 
ning away. 

Pelo  mew  is  rendered  into  English  by  through;  as, 
pelo  meio  dos  campos,  through  the  fields. 

Por  meio  is  rendered  into  English  by  by ;  as,  elle 
alcanpou  o  sen  intento  por  meio  de  astucias,  he  has  com- 
passed his  ends  by  devices. 

Por  turno  signifies  in  one's  turn. 

Por  before  the  infinitive  is  used  instead  of  para  by  the 
best  Portuguese  writers,  and  porque  instead  of  para  que  ; 
as  may  be  seen  particularly  in  Camoens,  canto  2,  stanzas 
vti.  and  viii.,  and  in  the  following  example :  por  nao  or 


198  PREPOSITIONS. 

* 

para  ndo  repetir  o  quejd  temos  dito,  not  to  repeat  what  we 
have  already  said. 

For  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  for,  upon 
the  account  of,  for  the  sake,  &c. :  as,  elle  fard  isto  por  amor 
de  v6s,  he  will  do  this  upon  your  account,  or  for  your  sake  ; 
deixardo-o  por  morto,  he  was  left  for  dead  ;  eu  tenho-o  por 
men  amigo,  I  take  him  to  be  my  friend ;  todos  os  homens 
de  bem  sdo,  or  estdo,  por  elle,  all  honest  people  are  for  him, 
or  are  on  his  side ;  por  quern  me  tomais  v6s  ?  for  whom  do 
you  take  me  ? 

We  have  already  observed  that  porque,  without  an  in- 
terrogation, signifies  because ;  but  it  has  the  same  signi- 
fication in  the  following  sentence,  and  the  like  :  porque  elle 
e  mentiroso  segue-se  que  tambem  eu  o  seja  ?  because  he  is  a 
liar,  does  it  follow  therefore  that  I  am  one  1 

Por  isto,  or  por  ista  razdo,  signifies  therefore. 

0  porque  signifies  the  reason,  the  cause,  or  the  subject ; 
as,  sabe-se  o  porque  ?  is  it  known  upon  what  account  1 

Por  modo  de  dizer  signifies  as  one  may  say,  if  I  or  we 
may  say,  &e. 

Por  diante  signifies  before;  .and  por  detraz  signifies 
behind. 

Por  ventura  signifies  perhaps. 

Pelo  passado  signifies  formerly,  in  time  past,  heretofore. 

Por  nenhum  caso,  by  no  means. 

Por  mar  e  por  terra,  by  sea  and  land. 

Um  por  um  signifies  one  by  one. 

Por  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  in;  as, 
dies  sao  vinte  por  todos,  they  are  twenty  in  all. 

When  the  verb  passar  is  followed  by  por  then  the 
word  alto  signifies  to  forget  ;  as,  passou-lhe  aquillo  por  alto, 
he  forgot  that :  but  speaking  of  goods  it  signifies  to 
smuggle. 

Por  joined  with  the  verb  ir  signifies  to  fetch  and  to  go 


PREPOSITIONS.  199 

for :  as,  vai  por  vinho,  go  fetch  some  wine ;  vaipelo  medico, 
go  for  the  physician. 

Por  is  commonly  used  before  substantives :  as,  por 
exemplo,  for  example ;  por  commodidade,  for  conveniency  ; 
por  costume,  for  custom's  sake  :  and  many  others,  that  may 
be  learned  by  use. 

You  must  observe  that  pelo  serves  for  the  masculine, 
pela  for  the  feminine,  and  por  for  both. 

CONTRA. 

X.  Contra,  against,   contrary  to,   denotes  opposition ; 
as,  que  diz  vmce  contra  isto  ?  what  do  you  say  against  this  1 
It  signifies  also,  over  against,  opposite  to. 

Pro  e  contra  signifies  in  English  pro  and  con. 

DESDE. 

XI.  Desde  denotes  both  time  and  place  and  enumera- 
tion of  things,  and  is  commonly  followed   in  the  sentence 
by  the  preposition,  ate,  to ;  then  desde  denotes  the  term 
from  whence,  and  ate',  that  of  hitherto  :  as, 

Desde  o  principio  aid  o  Jim,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end. 

Elle  foi  a  pe desde  Windsor  ate  Londres,  he  walked  from 
Windsor  to  London. 

Eu  tenho  visto  todos  desde  o  primeiro  ate  o  ultimo,  I 
have  seen  them  all  from  the  first  to  the  last ;  fordo  todos 
mortos  desde  o  primeiro  ate  o  ultimo,  they  were  all  slain  to 
a  man. 

Desde  a  creaydo  do  mundo,  from  or  since  the  creation. 

Desde  o  ber$o,  ou  infancia,  from  the  cradle,  from  a 
child. 

Desde  jd,  even  now ;  as,  desde  jd  prevejo,  I  even  now 
foresee. 


200  PREPOSITIONS. 

.Desde  agora,  from  this  time  forward. 
Desde  entao,  from  that  time  ever  since. 
Desde  que,  as  soon  as,  since. 
Desde  quando  ?  how  long  since,  or  ago  ? 
Eio  navegavel  desde  a  sua  nascente,  a  river  navigable  at 
its  very  rise. 


XII.  Ate  signifies  till,  even,  to,  &c.,  as  you  may  see  in 
the  following  examples  : — 

Ate  onde  ?  how  far  ] 

Ate  Roma,  as  far  as  Rome. 

Ate  quando  ?  till  when,  or  how  long  ? 

Ate  que  eu  viva,  as  long  as  I  live. 

E  um  homem  de  tanta  bondade,  que  at6  os  seus  inimigos 
sdo  obrigados  a  estimal-o,  he  is  so  good  a  man  that  even 
his  enemies  have  a  value  for  him. 

Ate1  os  mais  vis  homens  tomavao  a  liber  dade  de,  &c.,  the 
very  worst  of  men  took  such  a  liberty  as  to,  &c. 

Ate  que,  until,  till. 

Ate  ds  orelhas,  up  to  the  ears. 

Elle  vendeo  ate  a  camisa,  he  has  sold  the  very  shirt  off 
his  back. 

A  te"  agora,  or  ate"  aqui,  till  now,  or  hitherto. 

At6  aqui  (speaking  of  a  place),  to  this  place,  hither, 
so  far. 

Ate1  la,  to  that  place,  so  far. 

Ate  que  isto  se  fa$a,  till  it  be  done. 

Ate  entao,  till  then,  till  that  time. 

Ate  is  also  used  before  an  infinitive;  as,  gritar  ate1 
enrouquecer,  to  bawl  oneself  hoarse. 

Rir  ate  ndo  voder  mais,  to  split  one's  sides  with 
laughing. 

Dar  de  comer  a  alguem  aid  o  fartar,  to  fill  or  cram  one 
with  food  till  he  bursts. 


PREPOSITIONS.  201 

At6  d  primeira,  till  our  next  meeting,  till  we  meet 
again. 

POB  CIMA. 

XIII.  For  cima,  above,  over,  denotes  superiority  of 
place ;  as, 

Morar  por  cima  de  alguem,  to  live  or  lodge  above 
somebody. 

A  balla  Ike  passou  por  cima  da  cabe$a,  the  ball  went 
over  his  head. 

Por  cima  de  tudo,  upon  the  whole. 

PARA  CIMA. 

XIV.  Para  cima,  above,  denotes  superiority  of  age, 
and  is  sometimes  put  at  the  end  of  the  sentence ;  as, 

Elles  alistaram  todos  os  que  tinhao  de  dez  annos  para 
cima,  they  enlisted  everybody  above  ten. 

ACIMA. 

XV.  Acima,    above,  denotes    rank,  and   some    moral 
subjects ;  as, 

Acima  d'elle,  above  him,  or  superior  to  him. 

Estar  acima  de  tudo,  to  be  above  the  world. 

Uma  mulher  que  estd  acima  de  tudo,  ndo  se  Ike  dd  do 
que  o  mundo  diz  d'ella,  a  woman  who  is  above  the  public 
censure,  does  not  care  what  people  say  of  her. 

EM    CIMA. 

XVI.  Em  cima,  upon  ;  as,  em  cima  da  mesa,  upon  the 
table. 


202  PREPOSITIONS. 

Em  cima  de  tudo  isto,  or  only  em  cima,  signifies  and 
besides  all  that,  over  and  above  all  that. 

DE  CIMA. 

XVII.  De  cima,  when  it  is  an  adverb,  signifies  from 
above;  but  when  a  preposition,  it  is  rendered  into  English 
by  from,  of,  or  from  off  ;  as, 

Tira  aquillo  de  cima  da  mesa,  take  that  from  off  the 
table. 

Elle  nunca  apartou  os  sens  olhos  de  cima  d\'ella,  he  never 
turned  his  eyes  from  her. 

Cahir  de  cima  das  arvores,  to  fall  off  the  trees. 

DEBAIXO. 

XVIII.  The  preposition  debaixo,  under,  below,  or  from 
under,  signifies  subjection  to  a  sway  or  government,  and 
an  epoch ;  as,  debaixo  do  imperio  de  Auausto,  under  the 
empire  of  Augustus. 

Debaixo,  as  a  preposition  of  place,  marks  out  inferiority 
of  position ;  as, 

Tudo  o  que  ha  debaixo  dos  cdos,  all  there  is  under 
heaven. 

Ter  uma  almofada  debaixo  dos  joelhos,  to  have  a  cushion 
under  the  knees. 

Estar  debaixo  de  chave,  to  be  under  lock  and  key. 

Debaixo  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  upon  ; 
as,  affirmar  uma  cousa  debaixo  de  juramento,  to  swear  a 
thing,  to  declare  upon  oath. 

ABAIXO. 

XIX.  This  preposition  is  rendered  into    English  by 
under,  inferior,  or  next :  as,  assentou-se  abaixo  d'elles,  he 
sat  inferior  to  or  under  them  ;  assentou-se  abaixo  de  mim, 


PREPOSITIONS.  203 

he  sat  next  inferior  to  me  ;  abaixo  d'el-rei  elle  e  o  primeiro, 
he  is  the  next  man  to  the  king. 

This  preposition  is  sometimes  put  at  the  end  of  the 
following  phrases  :  de  telhas  abaixo,  here  below  in  this 
lower  world  ;  de  cabe$a  abaixo,  headlong. 

FO*RA. 

XX.  F6ra,  out,  without,  except,  but,  denotes  exclusion 
and  exception.  It  requires  generally  a  genitive  before 
a  noun  of  time  or  place ;  but  it  governs  also  the  nomi- 
native :  as, 

F6ra  do  reino,  out  of  the  kingdom. 

F6ra  da  cidade,  out  of  town. 

F6ra  de,  tempo,  out  of  season. 

Procura-o  f6ra  de  casa,  look  for  him  without  doors. 

Elles  sahiram  todos,  f6ra  dous  ou  tres,  they  all  went 
out,  except  or  but  two  or  three. 

Elle  Ike  permite  tudo,  fora  o  ir  ds  assembleas,  he  indulges 
her  in  everything  but  in  going  to  assemblies. 

Elle  tern  todos  os  poderes,  f6ra  o  de  concluir  este  negocio, 
he  has  full  powers  except  of  concluding  this  business. 

F6ra  is  sometimes  preceded  by  too,  and  then  it  is  to  be 
rendered  into  English  by  so  far  ;  as,  elle  estd  tdo  f6ra  de 
soccorrer  os  sens  alliados,  que  se  declara  contra  elles,  he  is 
so  far  from  assisting  his  allies,  that  he  declares  himself 
against  them. 

Fora  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  besides  ; 
as,  f6ra  d'aquelles  que,  &c.,  besides  those  that,  &c.  :  and 
sometimes  by  beyond;  as,  f6ra  de  medida,  beyond 
measure. 

F6ra  de  koras,  signifies  beyond  the  hour,  or  very  late. 

Pdr  alguem  fora  da  porta,  or  mandar  alguem  pela  porta 
fora,  to  turn  one  out  of  doors. 


204  PREPOSITIONS. 

DE     FBONTE. 

XXI.  This  preposition  governs  the  genitive,  and  signi- 
fies over  against.  It  is  followed  by  de,  do,  da,  &c.  ;  as, 

De  f route,  da  sua  casa  estd  urn,  outeiro,  over  against  his 
house  is  a  hill. 

Eu  estava  def route  d'elle,  I  was  over  against  him. 


SEM. 

XXII.  Sem  signifies  without ;  as, 

Sem  dinheiro,  without  money. 

Sem  duvida,  without  doubt. 

Sem  dar  a  entender,  or  sem  fazer  conJiecer,  without 
giving  to  understand. 

Sem  mais  nem  menos,  without  any  reason,  or  provo- 
cation. 

Estar  sem  amo,  to  be  out  of  place. 

Sem  que  algum  acto  precedente  possa  derrogar  o  presente, 
any  former  act  to  the  contrary  of  the  present  notwith- 
standing. 

Sem  governs  also  the  infinitive,  which  is  rendered  into 
English  with  the  participle ;  foliar  sem  saber,  to  speak 
without  knowing. 

It  is  also  a  conjunction  with  que,  governing  the  sub- 
junctive ;  as, 

Enfada-se  sem  que  Ike  digdo  nada,  he  is  angry  without 
anybody  saying  anything  to  him. 

Ndo  era  eu  jd  bastantemente  infeliz,  sem  que  procurasseis 
de  acrescentar  a  minha  infelicidade  ?  was  I  not  miserable 
enough  before,  but  you  must  still  labour  to  make  me 
more  so  "? 

Lembro-me  sem  que  me  digais^  I  remember  without  your 
telling. 


PREPOSITIONS.  205 

Elle  vird  sem  que  mandem  por  elle,  he  will  come  without 
sending  for  him. 


CONFORMS,  Or  SEGUNDO. 

XXIII.  Conforme,  or  segundo,  according  to,  conform- 
able to,  govern  the  nominative,  and  never  the  dative,  as 
in  English ;  as, 

Elle  foi  tratado  conforme  o  sen  merecimento,  he  was 
treated  according  to  his  deserts. 

Conforme  o  men  parecer,  in  my  judgment,  in  my 
opinion. 

In  common  conversation  conforme  is  used  adverbially, 
and  rendered  into  English  as  follows : 

Isso  6  conforme,  or  only  conforme,  that  is  right,  may  be, 
that  is  according. 

Conforme  a  occasido  o  pedir,  according  as  there  may  be 
need. 

SOBRE. 

XXIV.  Sobre  signifies  upon :  as,  sobre  a  mesa,  upon 
the  table ;  sobre  o  rio,  upon  the  river. 

Sobre  tudo,  or  sobre  todas  as  coisas,  over  all,  above  all, 
above  all  things,  above  anything,  especially ;  as,  sobre 
tudo  tende  cuidado  na  saude,  but,  above  all  things,  mind 
your  health. 

Por  alguem  sobre  si,  or  dar-lhe  o  primeiro  lugar,  to 
place  one  above  himself. 

Ir  sobre  uma  cidade,  to  march  against  a  town. 

Ir  sobre  alguem,  to  fall,  or  to  rush  upon  one. 

Ir  sobre  seguro,  to  go  upon  sure  grounds. 

Sobre  a  noite,  about  or  towards  the  evening. 

Sobre  o  verde,  somewhat  green. 

Sobre  a  minha  palavra,  upon  my  word. 


206  ,      .PREPOSITIONS. 

Sobre  palavra,  upon  parole. 

Mandar  carta  sobre  carta,  to  send  letter  upon  letter. 

Elle  recebeo  a  carta  sobre  o  jantar,  he  had  just  dined 
when  he  received  the  letter. 

Elle  dorme  sobre  o  jantar,  he  sleeps  immediately  after 
dinner. 

Sobre  isto,  or  sobre  estas  coisas,  is  sometimes  rendered 
into  English  by  more  than  that,  or  besides  thai;  as, 

Elle  o  roubou,  e  sobre  isto  matou-o,  he  robbed  him,  and 
more  than  that,  he  killed  him. 

Sobre  que  is  rendered  into  English  by  though,  or 
although  ;  as, 

Este  negocio  sobre  que  I  difficultoso  ndo  ef  impossivel, 
although  this  is  a  hard  affair,  yet  it  is  not  impossible. 

Sobre  is  rendered  into  English  sometimes  by  besides  ;  as, 

Sobre  as  miserias  da  guerra,  elle  teve  a  desgraca,  &c., 
besides  the  miseries  of  the  war,  he  had  the  misfortune 
of,  &c. 

Estar  sobre  si,  or  andar  sobre  si,  signifies  to  stand 
upon  one's  guard. 

Eu  vos  escreverei  sobre  esta  materia,  I  will  write  to  you 
about  this  matter. 

ACERCA. 

XXV.  Acerca  signifies  about:  as,  dcerca  d'istolhe  disse, 
about  this  I  told  him ;  dcerca  de  Id  ir  Ike  respondi,  about 
going  there  I  answered  him. 

PERTO,  JUNTO,  AO  PE,  PEGADO. 

XXVI.  Perto,  near,  by,  about,  denotes  proximity  of 
place  and  time,  and  governs  the  genitive  case  ;  as,  aquillo 
estd  muito  perto  do  lume,  that  is  very  near  the  fire ;  perto 
das  oito  horas,  about  eight  o'clock. 

Perto  do  rio,  near  the  river. 


PARTICLES.  207 

Estamos  perto  do  Natal,  we  are  near  Christmas. 

Ao  pe  requires  also  the  genitive  case ;  as, 

Assentai-vos  ao  pe  de  mini,  sit  down  by  me,  or  near  me  ; 
ao  p6  do  rio,  near  the  river,  &c. 

Note,  that  junto,  near  or  near  by,  and  pegado,  hard  by, 
require  the  dative  case ;  as, 

Junto  d  ddade,  near  the  town. 

Peg  ado  ao  palacio,  hard  by  the  palace. 

LONGE. 

Longe,  far,  a  great  way  off,  governs  the  genitive,  and 
the  particle  de,  or  do,  da,  &c.;  as, 
Longe  de  casa,  far  from  home. 
Longe  d'aqui,  far  from  hence. 

DE   LONGO,    or   AO    LONGO. 

This  preposition  requires  the  genitive  case ;  as, 
Ao  longo  da  praia,  along  the  coast. 
Ao  longo  da  costa,  do  prado,  &c.,  along  the  coast,  the 
meadow,  &c. 


OF  FUETHEB  PABTICLES. 
AINDA,  A1NDA  QUE,  POSTOQUE    Or   QUANDO  BEM,  AINDA  ASSIM 

or  COMTUDO. 

Ainda  signifies  yet ;  as,  elle  ainda  nao  veio,  he  is  not 
come  yet.  It  signifies  also  even  ;  as,  seria  vergonha  ainda 
foliar  d'isso,  it  were  a  shame  even  to  speak  of  it;  nem 
ainda  por  cem  libras,  not  even  for  a  hundred  pounds. 

Ainda  que  signifies  though  or  although  :  as,  ainda  que 
v6s  sois  mais  velko  do  que  elle,  though  you  be  older  than 
he ;  ainda  que  assim  fosse,  though  it  were  so. 


208  PARTICLES. 

Ainda  que  is  very  often  followed  by  comtudo,  yet  for 
all  that ;  as,  ainda  que  elle  ndo  tivesse  necessidade  d'isso, 
comtudo,  &c.,  though  he  had  no  need  of  it,  yet,  <fec. 

Ainda  assim,  or  comtudo,  is  sometimes  rendered  into 
English  by  nevertheless,  or  for  all  that ;  as,  ainda  assim 
sempre  elle  foi  louvavel,  he  was  praiseworthy  for  all  that. 

JA    DESDE,    JA    QUE,    and  3L   POR   QUE. 

Jd  desde  is  rendered  into  English  by  even  from ;  as, 
jd  desde  o  principio,  even  from  the  beginning. 

Jd  que  signifies  since;  as,  jd  que  isso  assim  d,  since  it 
is  so. 

The  particle  que  sometimes  is  not  placed  immediately 
after  jd ;  &s,jd  ha  dois  annos  que  morreo,  he  died  two 
years  since  or  ago. 

Jd  ha  muito  tempo  que  sahistes  de  casa,  it  is  a  long 
time  since  you  went  from  home. 

Jd  por  que  is  repeated  in  the  same  sentence,  and  then 
the  first  is  rendered  into  English  by  first,-  because;  and 
the  second  by  secondly,  because;  as,  jd  por  que  era  cego, 
jd  por  que  era  coixo,  first,  because  he  was  blind,  and 
secondly,  because  he  was  lame. 

DEPOTS  QUE. 

Depois  que  is  rendered  into  English  by  after ;  as, 
depois  que  eu  tinha  entrado,  after  I  was  gone  in. 

COM   QUE. 

Com  que  is  only  a  note  either  of  introduction  or  con- 
nexion ;  as, 

Com  que  havia  um  homem  doente,  &c.,  now  a  certain 
man  was  sick ;  sometimes  they  add  to  it  the  particle 


PARTICLES.  209 

assim,  and   then  it  is  to  be  rendered   into  English  by 
and  so. 


ou. 

Ou  signifies  or  or  either:  as,  ou  bom,  ou  mdo,  either 
good  or  bad ;  mais  ou  menos,  more  or  less ;  ou  elle  queira 
ou  ndo,  whether  he  will  or  not, 

QUER. 

Quer,  when  a  particle,  must  be  repeated,  and  the  first 
is  rendered  into  English  by  either  or  whether,  and  the 
second  by  or  :  as,  quer  elle  queira  quer  nao,  whether  he 
will  or  not ;  quer  vds  o  tenhais  feito,  quer  ndo,  whether  you 
have  done  that,  or  not. 

SB    QUER,    Or   AO    MENOS. 

Se  quer,  or  ao  menos,  &c.,  signifies  at  least,  however  : 
as,  se  vos  ndo  quereis  ser  por  elle  nao  sejais  se  quer  contra 
elle,  if  you  do  not  choose  to  be  for  him,  at  least  do  not 
oppose  him ;  dai-lhe  se  quer  com  que  sustentar-se,  give  him, 
however,  a  subsistence  ;  o  nosso  primeiro  Jim  £  livrar-nos 
de  todos  os  males,  ao  menos  dos  maiores,  our  chief  end  is  to 
be  freed  from  all  evils,  at  least  the  greatest. 

Nem  se  quer  um  is  rendered  into  English  by  not  even 
one  ;  as,  fordo  todos  mortos,  e  nem  se  quer  um  escapou,  they 
were  all  slain  to  a  man. 

QUANDO   MUITO. 

Quando  muito,  at  most,  at  furthest,  is  generally  used 
before  the  nouns  of  time  and  price  :  as,  elle  estard  aqui 
dentro  em  um  mez  quando  muito,  he  will  be  here  in  a 
month  at  furthest ;  dez  libras  quando  muito,  ten  pounds 
at  most. 

P 


210  PARTICLES. 


TANTO. 

Tanto,  so  much,  is  sometimes  followed  by  como,  and 
then  it  is  rendered  into  English  by  as  well  as,  as  much 
as,  &o. 

Amo-te  tanto  como  a  mim  mtsmo,  I  love  thee  as  well  as 
myself. 

Elle  teme  tanto  como  qualquer  de  vos,  que  Ihe  resulte 
algum  dano,  he  is  afraid  of  harm  as  much  as  any  of 
you. 

Cuidei  que  a  estimasse  tanto  como  a  si  mesmo,  I  thought 
he  esteemed  her  as  much  as  he  did  himself. 

Elles  veem  tanto  de  dia  como  de  noite,  they  can  see  as 
well  by  day  as  by  night. 

Eu  five  tanto  como  vrfs,  I  had  as  much  as  you. 

Outro  tanto  is  rendered  into  English  by  the  double, 
twice  as  much,  or  as  much  ;  as, 

Eu  alcancei  outro  tanto  mais  por  isso,  I  had  as  much 
more  for  it ;  eu  posso  fazer  outro  tanto,  I  can  do  as  much. 

Tanto  mais  is  followed  by  que,  and  rendered  into 
English  by  and  the  more  so  as  ;  as, 

Eu  estou  prompto  para  ir  com  vmf*  um  dia  d'estes  d 
comedia  se  vmce  quizer  ;  tanto  mais  que  se  deve  representar 
uma  nova  peca  ;  I  am  ready  to  go  with  you  some  day  or 
other  to  the  play,  if  you  will  give  me  leave;  and  the 
more  so,  as  a  new  piece  is  to  be  acted. 

Tanto  que,  or  logo  que,  is  rendered  into  English  by  as 
soon  as,-  as,  tanto  que  eu  o  vi,  as  soon  as  I  saw  him. 

Tanto  melhor  is  rendered  into  English  by  so  much  the 
better. 

Tanto  is  sometimes  preceded  by  com,  and  followed  by 
que,  and  is  rendered  into  English  by  so,  provided  that :  as, 
com  tanto  que  o  facais,  provided  that  you  do  it ;  com  tanto 
que  me  nao  faca  mal,  so  he  does  me  no  harm. 


PARTICLES.  211 

Tanto  quanta  is  rendered  into  English  by  as  much  as  ; 
as,  tanto  quanta  posso,  as  much  as  I  can. 

TAG. 

Tdo,  so,  is  generally  followed  by  como  ;  as, 

Este  ndo  e  too  bom  como  o  outro,  this  is  not  so  good  as 
the  other ;  eu  sei  isso  tdo  bem  como  vos,  I  know  it  as  well  as 
you. 

Tdo  is  sometimes  followed  by  que,  and  is  rendered 
into  English  by  so,  such,  to  that  degree  ;  as, 

Elle  6  tdo  prudente  que  ndo  tern  igual,  he  is  so  wise 
that  he  has  not  his  equal ;  ndo  sou  tdo  louco  que  o  creia,  1 
am  not  so  simple  as  to  believe  it ;  faz  tdo  grande  vento  que, 
&c.,  the  wind  is  so  high  that,  &c.,  or  the  wind  blows 
to  that  degree,  &c. 

COMO. 

Como  is  rendered  into  English  by  as,  like,  how,  &c.,  as 
may  be  seen  in  the  following  expressions  : — 

Como  ?  how  1 

Dizei-me  como  Ihe  hei  de  foliar  ?  tell  me  how  I  may 
speak  to  him. 

Como  assim  ?  how  so  1 

Como  !  what ! 

Como  quer  que,  whereas. 

Como  quer  que  seja,  howsoever,  in  what  manner  or 
fashion  soever. 

Seja  como  for,  be  it  as  it  will. 

Como  isto  assim  e',  since  it  is  so. 

Como,  as  it  were,  or  almost. 

Como  se,  as  if,  or  even  as  if;  as,  como  se  elles  tivessem 
jd  vencido,  as  if  they  had  already  overcome. 

Como  tambem,  as  well  as. 

Rico  como  die  et  as  rich  as  he  is. 


212  PARTICLES. 

Como  sois  meu  amigo  quero,  &c.,  as,  or  because,  you  are 
my  friend,  I  will,  &c. 

Dizei-me  o  como,  tell  me  how. 

Eu  sei  como  fazer  para  que  elle  venha,  I  know  how  to 
make  him  come. 

Como  elle  Id  ndo  esteja,  eu  irei,  provided  he  is  not 
there,  I  will  come. 

ASSIM. 

Assim,  so,  thus,  is  rendered  into  English  as  in  the 
following  expressions  :— 

Pois  £  assim  de  veras  ?  de  veras  que  6  assim,  is  it  even 
so  1  it  is  even  so. 

Assim  seja,  or  seja  assim,  so  be  it,  or  be  it  so. 

Assim  e,  it  is  so. 

Para  assim  dizer,  as  it  were. 

Assim  sou  eu  louco  que,  &c.,  I  am  not  so  foolish  as  to, 
&c. 

Assim  Deus  me  salve,  as  I  hope  to  be  saved. 

Tanto  assim,  so  that. 

Assim  e  que  vos,  &c.,  is  this  your  way,  &c. 

Assim  como  assim,  after  all,  nevertheless,  or  for  all 
that ;  as,  em  vdo  dilatais  a  vossa  Jornada,  assim  como  assim 
e  preciso  que  vades,  it  is  in  vain  for  you  to  put  off  your 
journey,  you  must  go  thither  nevertheless,  or  for  all  that, 
you  must  go  after  all. 

Assim  como,  as  well  as,  or  as  soon  as. 

Basta  assim  por  agora,  enough  for  the  present. 

Assim  na  paz,  como  na  guerra,  both  in  time  of  peace 
and  war. 

Assim,  assim,  so  so,  indifferent. 

Assim  quizera  elle  como  pode,  he  can  if  he  will. 

Assim  is  sometimes  followed  by  que,  and  is  rendered 
into  English  by  how,  what ;  as,  assim  que  quer  isto  dizer  ? 


PARTICLES. 


213 


how  now  t  what  do  you  mean  by  this  ?  And  sometimes 
it  is  followed  by  como ;  as,  assim  como  o  sol  eclipsa  os 
outros  planetas,  da  mesma  sorte,  &c.,  as  the  sun  eclipses 
the  other  planets,  so,  <fcc. 


SE. 

Se,  if :  as,  se  elle  vier,  if  he  comes ;  se  me  amasses, 
should  you  love  me  ;  se  elle  fosse  homem  de  honra,  were 
he  but  an  honest  man ;  se  soubessem  quern  eu  sou  todos 
dirido,  &c.,  were  it  told  who  I  am,  every  one  would  say, 
&c. ;  se  J  verdade  que,  <fec.,  if  so  be  that,  <fec. 

The  reciprocal  verbs  as  well  as  those  that  are  used 
impersonally,  may  have  two  se  successively  :  as,  se  se  for, 
if  he  goes  away  ;  se  sefalla  d'isso,  if  they  speak  of  it. 

Se  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  whether;  and 
when  it  is  repeated,  the  second  is  rendered  into  English 
by  or  ;  as, 

Quizera  saber  se  a  culpa  e  nossa,  se  vossa,  I  would  know 
whether  it  is  our  fault  or  yours. 

ALIAS. 

Alids  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  else  ;  as, 
entrai,  porque  alids  fecharei  a  porta,  come  in,  or  else  I  will 
shut  the  door  ;  porque  alids  serido  os  vossos  filhos  immundos, 
else  were  your  children  unclean.  And  sometimes  it  is 
rendered  into  English  by  otherwise,  in  other  things  or 
respects. 

EMBORA. 

Embora  is  rendered  into  English  by  prosperously, 
auspiciously;  but  sometimes  it  is  a  particle  merely 
expletive,  and  answers  to  the  Italian  pure  :  as  dizei  muito 
embora  o  que  quizerdes,  say  what  you  please  :  the  Italian 


214  PARTICLES. 

says,  dite  pur  quel  che  vi  pidce,  you  may  say  what  you 
please. 

Muito  embora  seja  assim,  well,  let  it  be  so. 

Embora  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  away  ; 
as,  vai-te  embora,  go  away. 

SENAO. 

Sendo  signifies  if  not,  did  not,  were  it  not  that,  but 
that ;  as, 

Sendo  tivesse  medo  de  men  pai,  did  I  not  fear  my 
father. 

Se  elle  ndo  tivesse  vergonka  de  confessar,  were  he  not 
ashamed  to  confess. 

The  following  expressions,  in  which  they  make  use  of 
this  particle,  may  be  rendered  into  English  by  but,  for, 
and  some  other  variations. 

Sendo  fosse  por  elle,  but  for  him,  or  had  it  not  been  for 
him. 

Sendo  fosse  por  vos,  had  it  not  been  for  you,  without 
you,  without  your  help,  hindrance,  &c. 

Sendo  fosse  por  mim,  elle  morreria  de  fome,  were  it  not 
for  me,  he  would  starve. 

Sendo  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  but ;  as, 
nem  elles  tern  outro  intento,  sendo,  &c.,  nor  do  they  aim  at 
anything  else,  but,  <fec. 

Ninguem  disse  assim  sendo  Cicero,  nobody  said  so  but 
Cicero. 

Sendo  may  be  also  expressed  by  mais  que,  in  the  fol- 
lowing sentence  and  the  like  : 

Elle  ndo  faz  sendo  jogar,  or  elle  ndo  faz  mais  que  jogar, 
he  does  nothing  but  play. 


PARTICLES.  215 

NAO,    NAO   PORQUE. 

Ndo,  not  or  no,  when  followed  by  porque,  is  rendered 
into  English  by  not  that,  not  but  that :  as,  ndo  porque  Ike 
faltasse  engenho,  not  but  that  he  had  wit;  ndo  porque 
ndo  fosse  justo,  mas  porque,  &c.,  not  but  that  it  was  right, 
but  because,  &c. ;  ndo  porque  a  coisa  seja  impossivel, 
mas  porque,  &c.,  not  that  the  thing  is  impossible,  but 
because,  &c. 

TAMBEM,    Or  OUTROSI. 

Tambem,  or  outrosi,  signifies  also,  too,  likewise  ;  as,  v6s 
assim  o  quereis  e  eu  tambem,  you  will  have  it  so  and 
I  too. 

PARA    QUE,    PORQUE. 

See  the  prepositions  para  and  por. 

POIS. 

This  particle  is  very  much  used  by  the  Portuguese, 
and  is  rendered  into  English  several  ways,  as  in  the 
following  examples  : — 

Pois  ide,  e  vinde  logo,  go,  then,  and  come  back 
presently. 

Pois  ndo  sou  eu  capaz  de  fazel-o  ?  what,  am  I  not 
capable  of  doing  it  1 

Pois  or  pois  entdo  que  quer  dizer  isto  ?  well,  and  what 
is  the  meaning  of  this  ? 

Pois  or  pois  entdo  que  hei  de  fazer  ?  what  shall  I  do 
then1? 

Pois  eu  digo  que  elle  estd  dentro,  why,  he  is  here 
within,  I  say. 

Pois  porque  me  viaiais  ?  why,  then,  do  you  watch 
me1? 


216  PARTICLES. 

Elle  tern  cabepa  ;  pois  tambem  um  alfinete  a  tern,  he  has 
got  a  head  and  so  has  a  pin. 

Pois  before  nao,  and  preceded  by  an  interrogation, 
denotes  a  strong  assertion,  and  is  rendered  into  English 
by  without  doubt,  yes,  surely,  to  be  sure,  &c.,  as,  vird  elle  ? 
pois  nao!  will  he  come1?  yes,  to  be  sure! 

ANTES    Or  MAIS    DEPRES8A. 

These  particles  are  sometimes  rendered  into  English 
by  rather  or  sooner  :  as,  antes  or  mais  depressa  quizera 
morrer,  I  would  rather  die  ;  antes  quizera  viver  s6  que  no, 
vossa  companhia,  I  would  sooner  live  alone  than  be  in 
your  company.  Sometimes  antes  is  rendered  into  English 
by  before  :  as,  ide-vos  antes  que  elle  venha,  go  away  before 
he  comes  ;  antes  que  eu  morra,  before  I  die. 


MAS  ANTES,  PELO  CONTRARIO,  MAS  PELO  CONTRARIO. 

These  particles  are  rendered  into  English  by  on  the 
contrary,  on  the  other  hand,  nay  :  as,  mas  antes,  mas  pelo 
contrario,  or  pelo  contrario  isto  e  muito  di/erente,  nay,  it  is 
quite  another  thing  ;  mas  antes,  pelo  contrario,  &c.,  elle  e 
avarento,  nay,  on  the  contrary,  he  is  a  covetous  man. 


PARA   MELHOR   DIZER. 

This  phrase  is  rendered  into  English  by  nay :  as,  elle 
tern  jd  bastante,  ou  para  melhor  dizer,  mais  do  necessario,  he 
has  already  enough,  nay,  too  much ;  a  isto  e  que  no's 
chamamos  direito  das  gentes  ou  para  melhor  dizer,  da  razdo, 
this  is  what  we  call  the  law  of  nations,  which  may  be 
called  more  properly  the  law  of  reason. 


PARTICLES.  217 

QUE. 

We  have  already  observed  that  que  is  a  particle  which 
most  conjunctions  are  composed  of:  as,  ainda  que, 
although;  de  sorte  que,  so  that,  &c. 

The  particle  que  sometimes  is  the  sign  of  the  third 
person  of  the  imperative,  as  let  in  English  :  as,  que  falle, 
let  him  speak  ;  que  riao,  let  them  laugh. 

Que  is  Used  between  two  verbs,  to  determine  and 
specify  the  sense  of  the  first :  as,  eu  vos  asseguro  que  assim 
4,  I  assure  you  that  it  is  so ;  duvido  que  assim  seja,  I  doubt 
whether  it  is  so  or  not. 

Que  is  also  used  after  hora  in  the  beginning  of  a 
sentence,  and  followed  by  a  verb  in  the  subjunctive,  to 
denote  by  exclamation  one's  surprise,  aversion,  and 
reluctance  to  something ;  in  which  case  there  is  a  verb 
grammatically  understood  before  que;  as,  hora  que  se 
esquecesse  die  de  si  mesmo !  I  wonder,  or  is  it  possible 
for  him  to  have  forgotten  himself ! 

The  expression  of  admiration  is  sometimes  expressed 
without  any  verb :  as  que  gosto ;  e  ao  mesmo  tempo,  que 
pena  !  how  much  pleasure  and  trouble  at  once  ! 

Que  is  sometimes  repeated  ;  as, 

Que  bellos  livros  que  tendes,  what  fine  books  you  have 
got ;  que  bella  que  e  a  virtude  !  how  beautiful  is  virtue  ! 

Que  is  sometimes  followed  by  de ;  as,  que  de  penas 
ha  no  mundo!  how  many  troubles  there  are  in  the 
world  I 

Que  is  used  after  nouns  denoting  time,  and  is  sometimes 
rendered  into  English  by  when,  or  since,  &c.,  and  sometimes 
left  out ;  as, 

0  dia  que  elle  partio,  the  day  when  he  set  out. 

Quanta  tempo  ha  que  estais  em  Londres?  how  long  have 
you  lived  in  London  ? 


218  PARTICLES. 

Ha  dez  annos  que  faz  a  mesma  cousa,  he  has  done  the 
same  thing  these  ten  years. 

Ha  dez  annos  que  morreo,  he  died  ten  years  ago. 

Que  is  sometimes  rendered  into  English  by  because,  as 
in  Camoens,  canto  2,  stanza  xvi.,  que  levemente  um  animo, 
and  sometimes  by  that,  to  the  end  that,  in  order  to  ;  as  in 
Camoens,  canto  2,  stanza  xvii.,  que  como  vissem,  que  no 
rio,  &c. 

Que  before  se  in  the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  is  a 
redundancy  not  expressed  in  English ;  as,  que  se  v6s  dizeis 
que,  if  you  say  that,  &c. 

Que  is  used  after  the  conjunction  apenas,  scarcely  or 
hardly,  and  is  rendered  into  English  by  when :  as,  apenas 
acabou  de  foliar,  que  logo  morreo,  he  had  scarcely  done 
speaking,  when  he  expired. 

Que  sometimes  is  preceded  by  de  sorte,  de  maneira,  de 
geito,  and  then  it  is  rendered  into  English  by  so  that,  in 
such  a  manner,  insomuch  that ;  as,  eu  o  farei  de  sorte  que 
fiqueis  contente,  I  will  do  it  so  that,  or  in  such  manner 
that,  you  shall  be  contented. 

DE  VERAS. 

De  veras  signifies  in  earnest ;  but  sometimes  it  is  ren- 
dered into  English  by  indeed :  as,  de  veras ;  ndo  o  posso 
crer,  indeed  !  I  can  hardly  believe  it. 

HORA. 

Hora  or  or  a  is  an  interjection  that  serves  to  encourage, 
as  we  have  seen  above  ;  but  when  it  is  repeated,  it  is 
rendered  into  English  by  sometimes,  awhile,  another  while  : 
as,  ora  estd  bem,  ora  estd  mal,  sometimes  he  is  well,  some- 
times ill ;  elle  ora  estd  de  um  parecer,  e  ora  de  outro,  he  is 
now  of  one  opinion,  and  next  moment  of  another.  Por 
ora  signifies  now,  for  the  present. 


ORTHOGRAPHY.  219 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

OF  THE  PORTUGUESE  ORTHOGRAPHY;  AND  OF 
CAPITALS  AND  STOPS. 

I.  PROPER  names,  as  well  as  surnames,  always  begin 
with  a  capital. 

II.  The  names  of   nations,  kingdoms,  and  provinces 
also  begin  with  a  capital :  as,  Franqa,  France  ;  Inglaterra, 
England,  &c. 

III.  All  names  of  dignities,  and  degrees,  and  honours, 
require  a  capital;  as,  Rei,  Bispo,  &c.,  King,  Bishop,  &c. 

IV.  At  the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  as  well  as  of  a 
verse,  the  first  letter  is  always  a  capital. 

The  names  of  arts  and  sciences,  as  well  as  those  of 
kindred,  begin  with  a  capital. 

OF  STOPS. 

The  use  of  stops,  or  points,  is  to  divide  words  in  a 
sentence. 

The  Portuguese  have  six  stops,  or  pauses,  viz. : — 

1.  The  ponto  final,  the  same  as  our  period  or   full 
stop  (.),  and  is  used  at  the  end  of  a  sentence,  to  show 
that  the  sentence  is  completed. 

2.  The  dois  pontos,  which  is  our  colon  (:),  and  is  the 
pause  made  between  two  members  of  a  period  ;  that  is, 
when  the  sense  is  complete,  but  the  sentence  not  ended. 

3.  The  ponto  e  virgula  is  our  semicolon  (;),  and  denotes 
that  short  pause  which  is  made  in  the  subdivision  of  the 
members  or  parts  of  a  sentence. 

4.  The  ponto  de  interroga$do,  the  point  of  interrogation, 
thus  (1). 


220  ORTHOGRAPHY. 

5.  Ponto   de    admira$do,    the    point   of    admiration, 
thus  (!). 

6.  The  virgula,  the  same  with  our  comma  (,),  and  is 
the  shortest  pause  or  rest  in  speech,  being  used  chiefly  to 
distinguish  nouns,  verbs,  and  adverbs,  as  also  the  parts  of 
a  shorter  sentence. 

The  conjunction  e,  the  relative  qual,  and  the  disjunc- 
tions ou  and  nem,  require  a  comma  before  them. 

The  Portuguese  make  use  also  of  a  parenthesis,  thus 
() ;  but  they  have  discontinued  the  use  of  the  diaeresis, 
called  by  their  printers  crema  (••)  ;*  they  use  also  the 
angulo,  thus,  A,  called  by  the  printers  caret. 

The  apostrophe,  or,  as  they  call  it,  viracento,  is  used  in 
this  as  in  other  languages,  being  designed  only  for  the 
more  pleasant  and  easy  pronunciation  of  words,  by  cut- 
ting off  an  antecedent  vowel ;  as,  dj  armas,  d'  elvas,  and 
not  darmas,  delvas,  &c. 

OF    THE   ACCENTS. 

The  accent  is  a  sound  of  the  voice  by  which  we  pro- 
nounce some  syllables  shorter,  and  others  longer. 

I  intend  to  speak  here  only  of  the  accents  the  Portu- 
guese ought  to  make  use  of,  according  to  Madureira,  in 
his  Portuguese  Orthography. 

The  Portuguese,  indeed,  are  acquainted  with  three 
accents,  but  they  ought  to  make  use  of  only  two,  namely, 
the  acute,  which  descends  from  the  right  to  the  left  ('), 
and  the  circumflex,  thus  (A). 

1.  The  acute  serves  to  prolong  the  pronunciation,  and 
is  put,  according  to  Madureira,  on  the  last  syllable  of  the 

*  The  diaeresis  was  formerly  used  in  the  Portuguese  orthogra- 
phy; so  much  so  that  it  has  even  three  names  in  that  language 
from  its  classical  times,  viz.,  dieresis,  apices, 


ORTHOGRAPHY.  221 

third   person  singular   of   the   future  tense ;  as,  amard, 
lerd,  &c. 

2.  On  the  penultima  of  the  preterpluperfect  tense  of 
the  indicative  mood ;  as,  amdra,  ensindra,  &c. 

3.  The   acute   accent   ought   to   be  put  also  on  the 
penultima  of  the  third  persons  of  the  present  tense  of  the 
verbs  renunciar,  pronunciar,  duvidar,  &c. — thus,  renuncia, 
pronuncia,  duvida,  &c. — that  they  may  be  distinguished 
from   the   nouns   renuncia,  pronuncia,  duvida,  &c.     The 
same  accent  is  also  put  on  estd,  no,  to  distinguish  them 
from  esta,*  this,  and  no,  in  the. 

The  vowel  o  has  two  sounds,  according  to  the  two 
accents  that  may  be  put  upon  it :  one  open,  when  it  is 
marked  with  the  acute  accent,  and  is  pronounced  like  o 
in  store  ;  the  other  close,  when  it  is  marked  with  the  cir- 
cumflex accent,  and  then  is  pronounced  like  u  in  stumble. 

There  are  many  nouns  and  adjectives  which  are 
accented  in  the  singular  with  the  circumflex,  and  in  the 
plural  with  the  acute ;  and  the  adjectives  that  have  two 
terminations,  particularly  those  ending  in  oso,  osa,  must 
be  accented,  in  the  singular,  with  the  circumflex  in  the 
masculine,  and  with  the  acute  in  the  feminine  ;  as, 

Fogo,  fire ;  plural,  fogos. 

Forno,  oven ;  plural,  fornos. 

Olho,  eye  ;  plural,  olhos. 

Ovo,  egg  ;  plural,  ovos. 

Osso,  bone  ;  plural,  tfssos. 

P6$o,  well ;  plural,  pfyos. 

Porco,  hog ;  plural,  pdrcos. 

Rdgo,  prayer;  plural,  r6gos.  And  also  fojo,  torno,  for- 
mdso,  sequioso,  supposto,  povo,  torto,  copioso,  &c. 

*  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  accents  are  not  commonly 
marked  in  most  of  these  terms,  and  the  others  given  as  exam- 
ples ;  but  they  are  put  here  to  designate  the  right  pronunciation. 


222  ORTHOGRAPHY. 

The  following  keep  the  circumflex  accent  in  both  num- 
bers :  bdlo,  bdlos  ;  bojo,  bojos  ;  boto,  botos;  cdco,  cdcos  ;  chdro, 
chdros  ;  coto,  cotos  ;  fdrro,  fdrros;  gordo,  gdrdos  ;  gosto, 
gostos  ;  gozo,  gozos  ;  lobo,  lobos  ;  mo$o,  moqos  ;  nojo,  nojos  ; 
pdtrO)  potros ;  tolo,  tolos ;  ferrdlho,  ferrolhos ;  raposo, 
raposos  ;  arroz,  arrozes  ;  algoz,  algozes,  &c. 

On  the  contrary,  the  following  keep  the  acute  accent 
in  both  numbers  :  copo,  c6pos  ;  modo,  modos  ;  nosso,  nossos  ; 
vossos,  &c. 

When  the  circumflex  accent  is  put  on  the  e,  then  the 
e  is  pronounced  like  the  French  e  ;  but  whene  is  accented 
with  the  acute  accent,  then  the  ^  is  to  be  pronounced  like 
the  e  open  in  French ;  and  is  exceedingly  sonorous  and 
long.  See  the  pronunciation  of  the  vowel  e. 

Nouns  ending  in  az,  iz,  oz,  uz,  must  have  the  acute 
accent  on  the  vowel  before  the  z  ;  as,  rapdz,  a  boy ;  noz,  a 
walnut ;  alcapiiz,  liquorice  :  but  you  must  except  arroz, 
rice  ;  algoz,  a  hangman. 

Nouns  ending  in  ez  generally  have  the  circumflex 
accent :  as,  mez,  a  month  ;  marquez,  a  marquis,  &c. 


SOME  OBSEKVATIONS  UPON  THE  POETQGUESE 
OETHOGEAPHY. 

Both  the  Portuguese  orthographers  and  best  authors 
vary  so  much  in  their  rules  and  ways  of  writing,  that  it 
is  impossible  for  any  grammarian  to  explain  clearly  this 
part  of  the  Portuguese  Grammar,  it  requiring  no  less 
authority  than  that  of  the  Royal  Portuguese  Academy. 
However,  not  totally  to  set  aside  so  material  a  part  of 
the  Grammar,  I  shall  present  the  learner  with  the  follow- 
ing observations  : — 

I.  When  the  Latin  words  from  which  the  Portuguese 


ORTHOGRAPHY.  223 

are  derived  begin  with  a  b,  the  Portuguese  likewise  must 
begin  with  it ;  therefore  you  must  write  and  pronounce 
the  b  in  the  following  words,  bom,  bondade,  bem,  bento,  &c., 
because  they  are  derived  from  bonus,  bonitas,  &c.  But 
you  must  except  bainka,  bexiga,  bairro,  which  begin  with 
a  b,  though  they  are  derived  from  vagina,  vesica,  vicus. 

II.  Likewise,  if  the  Latin  words  begin  with  a  v,  the 
Portuguese  words  derived  from  them  must  also  begin  with 
it ;  as,  vida,  viver,  varrer,  ver,  vinho,  &c.,  from  vita,  vivere, 
verrere,  videre,  vinum,  &c. 

Though  b  ought  to  be  pronounced  only  by  closing  the 
lips,  and  v  by  touching  the  superior  teeth  with  the  inferior 
lips ;  yet,  by  a  certain  affinity  between  these  two  letters, 
in  speaking  there  is  a  great  confusion  in  the  pronunciation 
of  them  in  the  province  of  Entre  Douro  e  Minho  ;  and 
this  confusion  has  not  been  peculiar  to  the  Portuguese 
language,  for  Nebrixa  says,  in  his  Castilian  Orthography, 
that  in  his  time  some  Spaniards  could  hardly  make  any 
distinction  between  these  two  letters. 

III.  The  p  found  in  some  words  originally  Latin,  is 
changed  in  Portuguese  into  a  b  ;  as,  cabra,  cabello,  cabeqa, 
<fec.,  from  capra,  capillus,  caput,  &c. 

IV.  The  y,  as   Bluteau  says,  must  be  made  use  of  in 
words   having   a   Greek   origin;  as,  syllaba,  Chrysopeia, 
pyramide,   polygono,     hydrographia,     hydropico,   physica, 
hyperbole,  hypocrita,  Apocrypho,  &c. 

V.  The  ph  are  used  in  the  Portuguese  in  some  words 
taken  from  the  Greek ;  as,  philosophia,  philologia,  Phila- 
delphia, epitaphio,  &c. 

VI.  The  r  in  Portuguese  has  two  pronunciations  :  one 
soft,  expressed  by  a  single  r,  as  in  arado,  a  plough,  and 
after  the  consonants  b,  c,  d,  f,  g,  p,  t ;  and  another  hard, 
in  which  two  r's  are  used  ;  as  in  barra,  carro,  &c.     But 
you  must  observe  : — 


224  ORTHOGRAPHY. 

1.  That  in  the  beginning  of  a  word  two  r's  must  never 
be  used,  because  then  the  r  is  always  pronounced  hard  in 
Portuguese  ;  as  in  the  words  remo,  rico,  roda,  &c. 

2.  When  the  consonants  I,  n,  s,  are  before  the  r,  either 
in  a  single  or  a  compound  word,  this  letter  must  never  be 
doubled,  because  then  its  sound  is  always  strong ;  as  in 
abalroa,  enriquecer,  honra,  Henrique,  Israelita,  &c. 

3.  The  r  after  a  6  is  also  pronounced  hard  in  com- 
pounds with  the  prepositions  ab,  ob,  sub,  and  yet  is  not 
doubled ;  as  in  abroaar,  obrep^do,  subrep^do,  &c. 

VII.  The  s  is  never  doubled  in  the  beginning  of  words, 
nor  after  the  consonants ;  therefore  you  must  write,  sarar, 
saber,  falsamente,  falso,  manso,  &c. 

The  s  is  pronounced  like  z  between  two  vowels,  in 
words  derived  from  the  Latin,  as  well  as  in  those  that 
end  in  osa  and  oso  ;  as,  musa,  caso,  riso,  amoroso,  cuidad- 
oso,  casa,  &c.  You  must  also  observe  that  coser  signifies 
to  sew,  but  cozer  signifies  to  boil  or  bake. 

VIII.  Th  are  generally  used  in  words  derived  from 
the   Greek;  as,  amphitheatro,   atheisto,  theoloao,   letharao, 
methodo,  &c.,  but  are  pronounced  like  t. 

Th  are  also  used  in  the  Portuguese  preposition  athe, 
though  some  write  it  thus,  ate. 

IX.  When  pt  are  found  in  Latin  words,  it  must  be 
kept   in  the    Portuguese  derived  from  them ;    as,  apto9 
inepto,  optimo,  &c,,  from  aptus,  ineptus,  optimus,  &c. 

The  same  must  be  observed  in  regard  to  ct. 

X.  Ch  are  sounded  like  k,  in  words  derived  from  the 
Greek ;   as,    archanjo,    archiduque,    Chrysostomo,  chrysol, 
chrysologo,  Christovao,  monarchia,  &c.     These  words  must 
be  written  with  ch,  in  order  to  preserve  to  the  eye  their 
etymology. 

Note,  that  ch  in  words  that  are  not  derived  from  the 
Greek  are  pronounced  like  ch  in  the  English  words  churchy 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 


225 


chin,  much  ;  but  as  some  confound  the  ch  with  the  x,  and 
begin  with  x  those  words  that  should  begin  with  ch,  I 
have  thought  it  necessary  to  make  a  collection  of  them. 

WORDS  BEGINNING  WITH 


CHA. 

Cha 

Chancela 

Charameleiro 

Chaa 

Chancelaria 

Char  co 

Chaga 

Chanceler 

Charneca 

Chacina 

Changoneta 

Charneira 

Chago 

Chanqueta 

Charola 

Chacota 

Chantagem 

Charpa 

Chafariz 

Chantrado 

Charro 

Chaga 

Chantre 

Charrua 

Chalupa 

Chao 

Chasco 

Chama 

Chapa 

Chasona 

Chamalote 

Chapado 

Chatim 

Chamar 

Chapeado 

Chato 

Chamariz 

Chapeleta 

Chavao 

Chambao 

Chape"o 

Chavascal 

Chamejar 

Chapim 

Chave 

Chamiga 

Chapinhar 

Chavalha 

Chamine 

Chapuz 

Chaveta 

Chamuscar 

Charamela 

Chavinha 

Changa 

Chea,  or  Cheia 

Chefe 

Chegar 


CHE. 

Cheirar,  and  its 
derivatives 


Cherivia 
Cherne 


Chiar 
Chibarro 

CHI. 

Chibo 
Chicharos 

Chichorro 
Chichelos 

Q 

226 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 


Chicoria 
Chicote 
Chifra 
Chifrar 

Chilrar 
Chimbeo 
Chincar 
Chincheiro 

Chiqueiro 
Chispa 
Chispar 
Chiste 

Chifre 

Chinchorro 

Chita 

Chilindrao 

Chinela 

CHO. 

Choga 
Choca 

Chocca 
Chocolate 

Chorro 
Chover 

Chocalhar 
Chocalho 
Chocar 
Chocarrear 
Choccarice 

Chofrado 
Chofre 
Choldabolda 
Cheque 
Chorar 

Choupa 
Choupana 
Choupo,  or  Chopo 
Chourigo 
Choutar 

Choco 

Chorrilho 

CHU. 

Chuga 
Chupamel 
Chupar 
Chuchurriar 

Chufa 
Chumago 
Chumbar 
Chumbo 

Churume 
Chusma 
Chuva 
Chuveiro 

Chugo 

Churriao 

CHY. 

Chyar. 

The  following  words  begin  with  ce  and  not  se 

CEA. 


Cea 


Cebola 


Ceado 


CEB. 


Cebolal 


Gear 


Cebolinho 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 

CED. 

Cedavim 
Cedela 
Cedenho 

Coder 
Cedilho 
Cedo 

Cedro 
Cedula 

CEG. 

- 

Cega 
Cegar 

Cego 
Cegonha 

Cegude 
Cegueira 

CEI. 

Ceifa 
Ceifao 

Ceirao 
Ceirinha 

Ceivar 

CEL. 

Colada 
Celebragao 
Cclebrar 
Celebre 
Celeste 
Celestial 
Celestrina 

Celeuma 
Celga 
Celha 
Celho 
Celibado 
Celibato 

Celicola 
Celidonia 
Cella 
Celleiro 
Celleireiro 
Celtas 

227 


CEM. 


Cem 


Cemiterio 


CEN. 

Cenaculo 

Censor 

Cento 

Ceno 

Censura 

Centoculo 

Cenobio 

Censurado 

Centopea 

Cenobitico 

Censurar 

Central 

Cenotaphio 

Centauro 

Centre 

Cenoura 

Centena 

Centuplo 

Cenrada 

Centeal 

Centuria 

Cenreira 

Centesimo 

Centuriao 

Censo 

Centeyo 

Ceo 

228 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 


CEP. 


C6pa 
Cepilho 

Cepo 

Ceptro 

CER. 

Cera 
Ceraferario 

Cereijal 
Ceremonia 

Certa 
Certo 

Cerbero 

Ceremonial 

Certao 

Cdrca 

Cerieiro 

Certeza 

Cercado 

Cerne 

Certidao 

Cercador 

Cernelha 

Certificar 

Cercadura 

Cerol 

Cerva 

Cercar 

Ceroulas 

Cerval 

Cerce 
Cerceado 

Cerqueiro 

Cerveja 
Cervilhas 

Cercear 

Cerralheiro 

Cerviz 

Cercilho 

Cerralho 

Ceruda 

Cerco 

Cerrar 

Ceruleo 

Cerdoso 

Cerrar-se 

Cervo 

Cerebro 

Cerro 

Cerzir 

Cereijas 

CES. 

Cesar 

Cessao 

Cestinho 

Cesarea 
Cesma 

Cessagao 
Cessar 

Cesteiro 
Cesto 

Cesmaria 

Cesta 

Cesura 

Cesmeiro 

Cestinha 

CEV. 

Ceva 

Cevadel 

Cevadouro 

Cevada 

Cevadeira 

Cevar 

CEZ. 


Cezao 


Cezimbra 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 


229 


N.B.  C error  signifies  to  shut  or  shut  up ;  but  serrar 
signifies  to  saw,  to  cut  timber  or  other  matter  with  a 
saw. 

The  following  words  must  have  ci,  and  not  si,  in  their 
beginning : — 

CIA. 
Ciar-se  Ciatica 


Ciba 


Cicatriz 


CIB. 

Cibalho  Ciborio 

cic. 
Cicero  Cicioso 


CID. 


Cidadao 
Cidadaos 
Cidade 

Cidadoa 
Cidra 
Cidrada 

Cidrao 
Cidreira 

CIE. 

Ciencia 

Cifar 


Cigana 
Cigano 


Cilada 
Cilhas 


GIF. 


Cifra 


CIG. 


Cigarra 
Cigude 


OIL. 


Cilhar 
Cilicia 


Cifrar 


Cigurelha 


Cilicio 
Cilladas 


230 


Cima 

Cimalha 

Cimbalo 

Oinca 

Cincar 

Cincho 

Cinco 

Cincoenta 


Cio 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 


CIM. 


Cimeyra 
Cimento 


CIN. 

Cingidouro 

Cingir 

Cingulo 

Cinnainomo 

Cinta 


CIO. 


Cioso 


Cimitarra 
Cimo 


Cintillar 
Cintura 
Cinza 
Cinzeiro 


Ciosa 


Cipo 


Cira 

Ciranda 

Cirandagem 

Ciraiidar 

Circo 

Circula^ao 

Circular 


Ciscar 
Cisco 


CIP. 
Cipreste 

CIR. 

Circulo 

Circuito 

Circumcidar 

Circumcisao 

Circumferencia 

Circumspecto 

Circumspecgao 

CIS. 

Cismatico 
Cisne 


Cipriano 


Circumstancia 

Circumstantes 

Cirio 

Cirugia 

Cirugiao 

Cirzir 


Cisterciense 
Cisterna 


Cita^ao 
Citado 


Citerior 
Cithara 


Citharedo 
Citrino 


ORTHOGRAPHY.  231 

CIU. 

Ciume  Ciumes 

civ. 
Civel  Civil  Civilidade 

ciz. 
Cizania  Cizento  Cizirao 

XI.  No  Portuguese  word  begins  with  f . 

The  f  is  used  after  p  in  those  Portuguese  words  that 
have  in  their  Latin  root  pt  :  as,  descrip^ao,  accepqao,  <fcc., 
from  descriptio,  acceptio,  &c. 


OF  DOUBLE  LETTERS. 

It  is  to  be  generally  observed  that  the  consonants  are 
doubled  in  those  Portuguese  words  whose  Latin  roots 
have  likewise  the  same  double  consonants  :  as,  accelerar, 
accento,  occidente,  &c.,  from  accelero,  accentus,  occidens,  &c.; 
affligir,  affluenda,  qffirmaqao,  &c.,  from  qffligo,  affluently 
affirmatio,  &c.,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  following  collection. 

B 

is  to  be  doubled  in  abbade,  abbacial,  abbadia,  abbadessa, 
abbreviatura,  abbreviar. 

C 

is  to  be  doubled  in  the  following  words,  and  some  of  their 
derivatives. 

Abstracgao  Accentuar  Accessivel 

AcQao  AccepQao  Accesso 

Accento  Accessao  Accessorio 


232 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 


Accidental 

Construcgao 

Inspecgao 

Accidente 

Contracgao 

Instrticgao 

Accelerada 

Correcgao 

Intellecgao 

Accelerado 

Interjecgao 

Accelerar 

Decocgao 

Intersecgao 

Acclamacao 

Deducgao 

Introducgao 

Acclamar 

Dejecgao 

Accomodagao 

Desoccupagao 

Manuducgao 

Accomodado 

Desoccupado 

Accomodar 

Desoccupar 

Objecgao 

Accumulagao 

Detracgao 

Obstrucgao 

Accumulado 

Dicgao 

Occasiao 

Accumular 

Diccionario 

Occasionar 

Accusagao 

Direcgao 

Occaso 

Accusado 

Distracgao 

Occidental 

Accusador 

Occidente 

Accusar 

Eccentrico 

Occiduo 

Accusative 

Ecclesiastico 

Occisao 

Adstricgao 

Erecgao 

Occurrer 

Afflicgao 

Evicgao 

Occultamente 

Attracgao 

Exacgao 

Occultado 

Extracgao 

Occultar 

Baccho 

Occulto 

Bocca 

Facgao 

Occupagao 

Boccaga 

Ficgao 

Occupado 

Boccadinho 

Fracgao 

Occupar 

Boccado 

Occurrencia 

Boccal 

Impeccabilidade 

Occurrente 

Tmpeccavel 

Circumspecgao 

Inaccessivel 

Peccado 

Coacgao 

Indicgao 

Peccador 

Cacgao 

Inducgao 

Peccadora 

Collecgao 

Infecgao 

Peccante 

Constricgao 

Infracgao 

Peccar 

ORTHOGRAPHY. 


Preoccupar 


Seccar 
Secco 


Projec9ao 
Protec9ao 
Putrefac9ao 


Reconduc9ao 


Resecc9aao 
Restric9ao 


Seccura 

Socco 

Soccorrer 

Soccorro 

Subtrac9ao 

Succeder 

Successao 

Successo 

Successive 

Successivel 

D. 


Successor 

Succintameiite 

Succinto 

Succo 

Successo 

Succubo 

TransacQao 
Traduc9ao 

Vacca 

Vaccada 

Vaccum 


This  letter  is  doubled  in  the  following  words  :  addirdo, 
addicionado,  addicionar,  additamento,  additar. 


F 


is  to  be  doubled  in 


AfFabilidade 

AfFeado 

Aflfavel 

AfFear 

AfFadigado 
AfFadigar 
Aflfagado 
AfFagar 
AfFagos 
AfFamado 

Affeamcnto 
AfFectadamente 
AfFectado 
AfFectar 
AfFecto 
Affectuoso 

AfFamar-se  , 

AfFei9ao 

AfFastado 
AfFastar 
Affazendado 

AfFei9oado 
AfFei9oar 
AfFeite 

AfFazer-se 

AfFeitar 

AfFeminado 

AfFeminar-se 

Afferradamente 

AfFerrado 

AfFerrar 

Afferretoado 

AfFerretoar 

Afferrolhar 

AfFerventado 

AfFerventar 

AfFervorado 

AfFervorar 

Affiado 


234 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 


Affiar 

AfForamento 

DifFerenga 

Affidalgado 

AfFormentar 

DifFerengar 

Affidalgar-se 

AfFormoseado 

DifFerengas 

Affigurado 

AfFormosear 

DifFerente 

Affigurar 

AfFoutado 

DifFerentemente 

Affilhada 

AfFoutar 

Difficil 

Affilador 

AfFouteza 

Difficuldade 

Affilar 

AfFouto 

Difficultar 

Affinado 

AfFracar 

Difficultosamente 

Affinar 

AfFramengado 

Difficultoso 

Affincado 

AfFreguesado 

DifFusao 

Affincar 

AfFreguesar-se 

DifFusamente 

Affirmadamente 

AfFronta 

DifFuso 

Affirmador 

AfFrontado 

Affirmar 

AfFrontamento 

EfFectivamente 

Affistular-se 

AfFrontar 

EfFectivo 

Affixar 

AfFrontosamente 

EfFeito 

Afflaniar-se 

AiFrontoso 

EfFeituar 

Afflicgao 

AfFroxadamente 

Efficazmente 

Afflicto 

AiFroxado 

Efficacia 

Affligir 

AfFroxar 

Efficaz 

Affluencia 

Affugeiitado 

Efficients 

Affocinhar 

AfFugentar 

Effigie 

Affogado 

AfFumado 

AfFogador 

AfFumar 

OfFender 

AfFogar 

AfFundado 

OfFerecer 

Affogamento 

AfFundar-se 

OfFuscar 

AfFogueado 

AfFundir-se 

Affoguear 

AfFuzillar 

SufFocar 

AfForado 

SufFragio,  and  some 

AfForador 

DiiFamado 

others 

AfForar 

DifFamar 

ORTHOGRAPHY. 


1>35 


G 


This  letter  is  to  be  doubled  in 


Aggravante 

Aggressor 

Exaggerar 

Aggravar 

Exaggeragao 

Suggerir 

Aggravado 

Exaggerador 

Suggestao 

Aggravo 

Exaggerado 

Suggerido 

L 

is  to  be  doubled 

in 

Aballado 

Alliviar 

Aquella 

Aballador 

Allucina9ao 

Aquelle 

Aballar 

Allucinar 

Aquillo 

Aballo 

Alludir 

Armellas 

Aballisado 

Allumiar 

Arrepellado 

Aballisador 

Allusao 

Arrepellao 

Aballisar 

Aniantellado 

Arrepellar 

Acafellador 

Amarello 

Atropellado 

Acafelladura 

Amarellecer-se 

Atropellar 

Acafellar 

Amarellidao 

Avillanado 

Acallentado 

Amollado 

Acalleatar 

Amollar 

Bacellado 

Acapellado 

Amollecer 

Bacello 

Affillado 

Amollecido 

Barbella 

Affillador 

Amollentar 

Barrella 

Affillar 

Am  poll  a 

Bella 

AllegaQao 

Annulla9ao 

Bellamente 

Allegado 

Annullar 

Bello 

Allegar 

Appellagao 

Belleza 

Allegoria 

Appellante 

Belleguim 

Allegorico 

Appellar 

Bellico 

Allegorisar 

Appellidar 

Bellicoso 

Alleluia 

Appelido 

Belligero 

236 


ORTHOGRAPHY, 


Belluino 

Delia 

D'elle 

Bulla 

Celleiro 

D'elles 

Bullario 

Clavellina 

Degollado 

Codicillo 

Degollagao 

Calliope 

Colla 

Degollar 

Camillo 

Collado 

Degolladouro 

Cavillagao 

Collar 

Distillagao 

Cavillosamente 

Colleira 

Distillador 

Cabal  lina 

Collagao 

Distillar 

Cadella 

Collateral 

Donzella 

Cadellinha 

Colecgao 

Duello 

Callo 

Collecta 

Camartello 

Collectivo 

Ebulli^ao 

Cambadella 

Collector 

Ella 

Cancella 

Collega 

Ellas 

Capella 

Collegiada 

Elle 

Capellao 

Collegial 

Elles 

Capellada 

Collegio 

Elleboro 

Capellania 

Colligar 

Ellipse 

Capello 

Colligir 

Elliptico 

Capillar 

Collyrio 

Emolliente 

Castella 

Collo 

Emollir 

Castello 

Collocagao 

Enallage 

Casullo 

Collocar 

Encapellado 

Casulla 

Colloquio 

Encapellar 

Cavalla 

Compellir 

Encastellado 

Cavallaria 

Compostella 

Encastellar 

Cavalleiro 

Constellagao 

Encelleirar 

Cavallo 

Corollario 

Equipollencia 

Cebolla 

Covello 

Equipollente 

Cebollal 

Courella 

Escabellado 

Cebollinho 

Escabello 

Chancellor 

D'ella 

Escudella 

Chancellaria 

D'ellas 

Escudellao 

ORTHOGRAPHY. 


237 


Kstilla^ao 
Estillado 

Gallico 
Gallinha 

Illuminativo 
lllusao 

Kstillar 
Estillicidio 
Estrella 

Gallinha^o 
Gallinheira 
Gallinheiro 

Illuso 
Illustragao 
Illustrar 

Estrellado 

Gallinhola 

Illustre 

Excellencia 
Excellente 
Expellir 

Falla 
Fallacha 

Galliopoli 
Galliota 
Galliza 
Gallo 
Gamella 
Gazella 

Illustrissimo 
Illjrio 
Imbella 
Impellir 
Incapillato 
Infallivel 

Fallacia 
Fallador 

Gella 

Inintelligivcl 
Intervallo 

Fallar 
Fallecer 
Fallecido 

Hellesponto 
Hendecasyllabo 
Hollanda 

Janella 
Janelleira 

Fallencia 
Fallido 

Hypallage 

Janellinha 
Jarmello 

Ferdizello 
Flagellante 
Flagello 
Folio 
Folliculo 

Illagao 
Illaquear 
Illativo 
Illegitimo 
]  lleso 

Libello 
Lordello 
Lousella 

Foutello 
Gabolla 

Illigar 
Illiciador 
Illicitamente 

Malfallante 
Mallogrado 
Mamillar 

Gallado 

Illicito 

Marcella 

Galladura 

Illocavel 

Marcellina 

Gallar 

Illudido 

Marcello 

Gal  lego 
Gallia 
Gallicado 

Illudir 
Illuminagao 
Illuminado 

Martellada 
Martellar 
Martello 

Gallicar 

Illuminar 

Martellinho 

238 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 


Medulla 

Palla 

Pusillanime 

Mellifluo 

Palladio 

Mello 

Pallante 

Quartella 

Metallico 

Pallas 

Millenario 

Palliado 

Rabadella 

Millesimo 

Palliar 

Rabellado 

Mirandella 

Pallidez 

Rebellao 

Miscellania 

Pallido 

Rebellar-se 

Molle 

Pallio 

Rebelliao 

Molleira 

Panella 

Rella 

Molleza 

Paradella 

Rodofolle 

Mollice 

Parallaxc 

Rodopello 

Mollidao 

Parallelo 

Rosella 

Mollificante 

Parallelogramo 

Ruella 

Mollificar 

Pelle 

Mollinar 

Pellesinha 

Monosyllabo 

Pellica 

Sells 

Pellicula 

Sellado 

Nella 

Phillis 

Sellador 

Nellas 

Pimpinella 

Sellagao 

Nelle 

Pollegada 

Sellar 

Nelles 

Pollegar 

Selleiro 

Nigella 

Pollez 

Sello 

Novella 

Pollucao 

Sentinella 

Novelleiro 

Polluto 

Sibylla 

Nulla 

Polysyllabo 

Sigillo 

Nullidade 

Portella 

Sigillado 

Nullo 

Postilla 

Sobrepelliz 

Nuzellos 

Pousafolles 

Sugilla^ao 

Prunelle 

Syllaba 

Odivellas 

Pulmella 

Syllabatico 

Ollaria 

Papilla 

Syllabico 

Olleiro 

Pupillo 

Syllogisar 

Ouguella 

Pusillanimidade 

Syllogismo 

ORTHOGRAPHY. 


239 


Tabella 
Tabelliao 

Tunicella 
Tullio 

Vellicae.ao 
Vellicar 

Tabellioa 

Velio 

Titillacao 
Titillar 

Vacillagao 
Vacillante 

Velloso 
Velludo 

Tolla 

Vacillar 

Vcrdesella 

Tollice 

Valla 

Villa 

Tdllo 

Vallado 

Villania 

Torcicollo 

Vallar 

Villaamente 

Tranquillidade 
Tranquillo 
Trella 

Valle 

Vassallagem 
Vassallo 

Villao 
Vitella 
Vitcllino 

Trisyllabo 

Valleidade 

Note.  Annular  signifies  to  annul ;  but  annular  is  an 
adjective,  and  signifies  annular,  or  in  the  form  of  a 
ring. 


is  to  be  doubled  in 
Accommodar 

Commemoracao 

Commenda 

Commensurar 

Commentar 

Commercial- 

Commetter 

Comminac.ao 

Commisera9ao 

Commissao 

Commissario 

Commogao 


M. 


Commodo 

Commover 

Commum 

Communger 

Communicar 

Communidade 

Commutar 

Consummar 


Desaccommodar 

Descommodo 

Dilemma 


Emmadeirar 

Emmadeixar 

Emmagrecer 

Emmanquecer 

Emmassar 

Emuiudecer 

Engommar 

Epigramma 


Flamma 

Flammante 

Flammula 


240 

•Gemina 
Gomma 
•Grammatica 

Immaculada 

Immanente 

Immarcessivel 

Immaterial 

Immature 

I  m  mediat  amente 

Immemoravel 

Immense 

Immensuravel 

Immobilidade 


ORTHOGRAPHY. 

Immoderadamente 

Immodesto 

Immodico 

Immolar 

Immortalisar 

Immqrtificado 

Immovel 

Immudavel 

Immundo 

Immunidade 

Immutavel 

Incommodo 

Incommunicavel 

Incommutavel 


Inflammar 

Mamma 
Mammar 

Recommend&r 


Somma 
Sommar 
Summa 
Summario 
Summidade 
Symmetria,     <ntd 
some  others. 


Note.  M  and  not   n,  is  always  made   use  of   before 
by  m,  p. 

N. 

is  likewise  doubled  in  several  verbs  compounded  with 
an,  en,  in,  con  ;  as,  annelar,  annexa,  anndo,  annata,  annel, 
anna,  Anno,  annular,  connexao,  connexo,  depennar,  em- 
pennar,  ennastrar,  tnnegrecer,  innato,  innagavel,  innocencia, 
manna,  Marianna,  panno,  penna,  when  it  signifies  a  pen, 
tyranno,  and  some  others. 


P. 

This  letter  is  to  be  doubled  in  words  beginning  with 
p,  compounded  with  the  Latin  prepositions  ad,  ob,  sub  ; 
us,  apparato,  apparecer,  oppor,  opprimir,  suppor,  Philippe^ 
pappa,  &c. 

Note.  Pappa  signifies  pap,  or  a  sort  of  food  for  children, 
but  papa  signifies  the  Pope. 


ORTHOGRAPHY.  241 

R. 

The  r  is  doubled  in  such  words  as  are  strongly  pro- 
nounced in  the  middle ;  as,  guerray  arrancar,  arredar, 
urrimar,  arruinar,  carregar,  carro,  &c. 

S. 

The  s  is  to  be  doubled  in  the  Portuguese  superlatives, 
because  it  is  doubled  in  the  Latin  roots  ;  it  is  also  doubled 
in  the  following  words  : — 


Abbadessa 

Assobiar 

Necessitar 

Accesso 

Assolar 

N'isso 

Aggressor 

Assombrar 

Nossa 

Amassar 

Assoprar 

Nosso 

Appressar 

Assustar 

Arremessar 

Atravessar 

Osso 

Assaltar 

Assanhar 

Condessa 

Passar 

Assar 

Passear 

Assegurar 

Essa 

Assessor 

Esse 

Remessa,  a 

Assignar 

otJiers. 

Assim 

Ingresso 

Assistir 

Isso 

T. 

T    is    doubled    in    the    following   words   and   their 
derivatives  : — 

Attenlperar  Attenuar  Attribuir 

Atten9ao  Attonito  Attribute 

Attender  Attrac9ao  Attri9ao 

Attentar  Attractive  Attrito 

AtteniKjao  Attrahir 

R 


242 
Commetter 

Demittir 

Enfittar 

Fitta 


ORTHOEPY. 

Intrometter 
Omittir 

Permittir 
Prometter 


Remetter 
Remetter 

Setta 
Settenta 


Trasmittir 


OF  THE  QUANTITY  OF  SYLLABLES  AND  THEIR 
SOUND. 

OF   WORDS    THAT   MAKE   THEIR   PENULTIMA    IN    a. 

Note.  Observe  what  we  have  before  mentioned  con- 
cerning the  accents.* 

All  words  ending  in  abo,  aba,  aco,  aca,  acho,  acha,  a$o, 
a<}a,  ado,  ada,  afo,  of  a,  ago,  aga,  agem,  agre,  alho,  alha, 
alo,  ala,  have  the  penultima  long ;  as,  didbo,  mangdba, 
macdco,  macdca,  cavdca,  mingdcho,  garndcha,  madra^o, 
linha^a,  amddo,  punkada,  (except  raldmpago,  antropdfago, 
levado,  and  cdgado,  (which  are  short  in  the  penultima), 
abdfo,  abafa,  saramdgo,  addga  (except  estomago,  dmago, 
amdraco,  which  are  short),  traldlho,  todlha,  beddlo  (except 
anomalo,  bufalo,  escdndalo,  which  are  short),  tanchdgem, 
vindgre. 

Words  ending  in  amo,  ama,  anho,  anha,  ano,  ana,  have 
their  penultima  long ;  as,  escdmo,  courdma,  costdnho, 
ardnha,  engdno,  pestdna ;  except  pdmpano,  timpano, 
bigamo. 

Words  ending  in  apo,  apa,  ague,  aro,  ara,  have  their 

*  Through  the  remainder  of  this  chapter  the  proper  accents 
are  expressly  marked,  for  the  sake  of  example ;  not  that  the  words 
usually  appear  so  accentuated. 


ORTHOEPY.  24$ 

penultima  long ;  as,  guardindpo,  soldpa,  basbaque,  em- 
pdro,  sedra  /,  except  cdntaro,  pucaro,  Idparo,  bdfaro,  Itiparo, 
pifaro,  picaro,  cdmera,  tdmara,  pdssaro,  LdzarOj  bdrbaro, 
cdcaras,  <fcc. 

Words  ending  in  aro,  arra,  arto,  ata,  avo,  ava,  axo,  axa, 
make  the  penultima  long;  as,  bizdrro,  bizdrra,  biscdto, 
patardta,  escrdvo,  escrdva  (except  concava  and  bisavo\ 
cartdxo,  tarrdxa. 


OF    WORDS    THAT    MAKE    THEIR    PENULTIMA    IN    e. 

All  words  ending  in  ebo,  eba,  edo,  eda,  efa,  have  their 
penultima  long ;  as,  mancebo,  manceba,  azedo,  azcda+ 
sanefa. 

Words  ending  in  efe  are  long  ;  as,  magarefe  :  as  well 
as  those  ending  in  eco,  eca,  e$o,  e$a ;  as,  bondco,  bonecar 
cabfyo,  cabfya. 

Words  ending  in  ego,  ega,  are  long :  as,  morcego,  socego, 
relego,  entrega,  allega ;  except  c6nego,  trdfego,  cdrrego, 
sofrego,  pecego,  folego,  bdtega,  cocegas. 

Words  ending  in  ejo,  eja,  elo,  ela,  are  long  ;  as,  caran- 
guejo,  bocejo,  igreja,  Alentejo,  enveja,  martelo,  guerrtta. 

Words  ending  in  emo,  ema,  eno,  ena,  are  long  :  as,. 
supremo,  postema,  aceno,  aqucena  ;  except  apdzema. 

Note.  The  penultima  is  short  in  the  word  ingreme. 

Words  ending  in  epo,  epa,  epe,  eque,  ero,  era,  are  long  : 
as,  decepo,  carepa,  julepe,  moleque,  severo,  seve'ra,  tempera, 
when  a  noun,  and  tempero,  when  a  verb  ;  except  dsperot 
prospero. 

Words  ending  in  eso,  esa,  ezo,  eza,  eto,  eta,  ete,  evo,  eva, 
eve,  are  long ;  as,  aceso,  acesa,  desprezo,  grandeza,  and 
despreso  (when  a  verb),  entremeto,  galhcta,  ramalhete,  bofete 
atrevo,  atreva,  air  eve. 


214  ORTHOEPY. 

OF    WORDS    THAT    MAKE    THEIR    PEN  ULTIMA    IN    i. 

Words  ending  in  ibo,  iba,  ibe,  icho,  icha,  iche,  ico,  ica, 
i$o,  ifa,  ice,  ido,  ida,  ifo,  ifa,  ife,  have  the  penultima  long  ; 
as,  estribo,  arriba,  arribe,  esguicho,  esguicha,  azemche,  pantco 
(a  sort  of  stuff),  botlca;  except  mecdnico,  ecumenico,  critico, 
politico,  pdnico  (panic),  and  some  others  borrowed  from 
the  Greek  and  Latin.  In  i$o,  ipa,  &c. ;  as,  roliqo,  preguica, 
velhice,  marido,  medida ;  except  h6mido,  pdllido,  hdrrido, 
and  some  others  derived  from  the  Latin.  In  ifo,  ifa,  &c.; 
aa,  borrifo,  alcatifa,  patife. 

Words  ending  in  igo  and  iga  are  long ;  as,  amigo, 
amiga  ;  except  prodigo,  prodiga. 

Words  ending  in  ijo  and  ija,  are  long ;  as,  affltjo, 
artemija. 

Words  ending  in  ilho,  ilka,  are  long ;  as,  atilho,  bae- 
t'dha.  Others  ending  in  ilo,  ila  ;  as,  gorgomUo,  perf'da, 
desfila. 

Words  ending  in  imo,  ima,  have  the  penultima  long; 
as,  opimo,  cadimo,  esgrima,  lastima  (when  a  verb);  except 
Idstima  (when  a  noun),  Jerdnimo,  pessimo,  and  all  the 
superlatives,  andnimo,  and  some  others. 

Words  ending  in  inho,  inha,  ino,  ina,  ipo,  ipa,  ipe,  have 
the  penultima  long  ;  as,  constipo,  constipa,  Euripo,  acipipe. 
Others  in  iquo,  iqua,  ique,  iro,  ira,  ire;  as,  iniquo,  iniqua, 
lambique,  retiro,  mentira,  si^iiro. 

Words  ending  in  iso,  isa,  izo,  iza,  ito,  Ita,  ivo,  iva,  ixo, 
ixa,  are  long  in  the  penultima ;  as,  aviso,  camisa,  juizo, 
ajuiza,  altivo,  altiva,  prollxo,  prolixa,  apito,  cabrito  ;  except 
•piilpito,  vomito,  decrepito,  espirito,  clebito,  and  some 
others. 


ORTHOEPY.  -  I  •"> 

RULES    FOR    SUCH    WORDS    AS    MAKE    THEIR 
PENULTIMA    IN    0. 

Words  ending  in  060,  oba,  obe,  obro,  obra,  obre,  have 
their  penultiina  long ;  as,  lobo,  loba,  arroba,  arrobe,  globo, 
alcova,  obro,  6bra,  cobre,  dobro. 

Words  ending  in  ocho,  ocha,  oco,  oca,  o$o,  o$a,  odo,  oda, 
ode,  oso,  osa,  ose,  have  the  penultinia  long  ;  as,  agarrocho, 
gaiTOcha,  carocha,  bidco ;  except  altiloco,  massaroco,  mi- 
nkoca,  almdfo,  mo$a  (a  girl),  mo^a  or  mossa  (a  notch), 
almo$o  (when  a  verb),  carro$o,  lodo,  boda,  bode,  pode  (the 
third  person  singular  of  the  present  indicative  of  the 
verb  poder),  pode  (the  third  person  singular  of  the  preter- 
perfect  definite  of  the  same  verb),  galhofa,  bofe. 

Words  ending  in  o/ro,  ofra,  ofre,  are  long ;  as,  alcacko- 
fra,  cofre,  enxofre. 

Words  ending  in  ogo,  oga,  ogue,  are  long;  as,  affogo, 
afoga,  a/ogue,  desafogo  (when  a  verb),  and  desafdgo  (when 
a  noun). 

Words  ending  in  ojo,  oja,  have  the  penultima  long  : 
as,  despojo  (when  a  verb),  nojo,  despojo  (when  a  noun). 

Words  ending  in  o/o,  ola,  ole,  are  long;  as,  violla,  galli- 
n/iola,  bbla,  engole,  miolo,  bolo,  rebdlo,  tdlo,  cebdla ;  except 
perola,  frivolo,  benevolo,  malevolo. 

Words  ending  in  omo,  oma,  ome,  have  the  penultima 
long  ;  as  morddmo,  redoma,  fome  ;  except  Thome. 

Words  ending  in  onho,  onJia,  ono,  ona,  have  the  penul- 
tima long ;  as,  bisonho,  risonha,  dono,  atafona,  dona  ; 
except  altisono  and  unisono. 

Words  ending  in  opla,  opo,  opa,  ope,  opro,  opra,  opre, 
oque,  have  the  penultima  long ;  as  manopla,  t6po,  topa, 
galope,  assopro  (when  a  verb)  ;  assopra,  assopre,  assopro 
(when  a  noun),  botoque. 

Words  ending  in  oro,  ora,  ore,  are  long  in  the  penul- 


246  ORTHOEPY. 

tima  ;  as,  penhoro,  penh6ra,  penhdre,  choro  (when  a  noun), 
chord  (when  a  verb);  except  bdcoro,  remora,  pdlvora, 
drovre. 

Words  ending  in  orro,  orra,  are  long;  as,  soccorro, 
nidrro,  cachorra  ;  and  some  others  ending  in  oso,  ose,  osa, 
ozo,  oza;  as,  primorosa,  primorosa,  industrioso,  industridsa, 
ciozo,  cioza,  descose. 

Words  ending  in  oto,  ota,  ote,  have  their  penultima 
long  ;  as,  goto,  gdta,  bota,  devoto,  frdta,  capdte,  garrote. 

Words  ending  in  ovo,  ova,  ove,  are  long  in  the  penul- 
tima; as,  ovo,  corcdva,  aprove. 

Words  ending  in  oxo,  oxa,  are  long  in  the  penultima  ; 
as,  rooco,  roxa,  pintarroxo. 

RULES    FOR   SUCH   WORDS   AS    MAKE    THEIR 
PENULTIMA    IN    U. 

Words  ending  in  ubo,  uba>  ubro,  ubra,  ucho,  ucha,  uco, 
iica,  iiqo,  u$a,  make  the  penultima  long;  as,  adubo, 
aduba  ;  except  silccubo,  incubo,  and  some  others ;  incubro, 
inctibra,  machi'icho,  embilcka,  cadtico,  cadtica, 


Words  ending  in  udo,  uda,  ude,  ufo,  ufa,  ufe,  ugo, 
nga,  ujo,  uja,  have  the  penultima  long ;  as,  felptido,  fel- 
ptida,  almiide,  panttifo,  adufa,  adiife,  sanguesuga,  caramujo, 
azambuja. 

Words  ending  in  ulho,  ulha,  ulhe,  ulo,  ula,  ule,  umo, 
umat  ume,  unho,  unha,  unhe;  as,  bayullio,  borbulha,  en- 
ttilhe,  engulo,  engtila,  bulebtile  ;  except  vocdbulo,  vestibulo, 
dngulo,  regulo,  opiisculo,  tremulo,  patibulo,  thuribulo,  and 
some  others ;  constimo,  consuma,  cardume,  testemiinho, 
testemunha,  empunhe. 

Words  ending  in  uno,  una,  une,  upo,  upa,  upe,  uque, 
tiro,  lira,  ure,  are  long  in  the  penultima ;  as,  desiino,  for- 


ORTHOEPY.  247 

tuna,  destine,  aptipo,  aptipa,  apfipe,  estuque,  maduro, 
madura,  aptire. 

Words  ending  in  uso,  usa,  use,  uzo,  uza,  uze,  uto,  uta, 
ute,  uxo,  uxa,  uxe,  have  the  penultima  long  ;  as,  parafiiso, 
parafusa,  parafuse,  reduzo,  reduza,  veduze,  condtito,  labuta, 
enxtita,  labute  ;  except  cdmputo  (when  a  noun),  repuxo, 
tmpuxa,  emptixe,  and  some  others  ending  in  itvo,  tiva,  five  ; 
as,  viuvo,  viuva,  envitive. 

Note.  When  the  penultima  is  immediately  followed  by 
another  vowel,  observe  that, 

A  before  e  must  be  accented  with  the  acute  accent, 
and  pronounced  accordingly  ;  as,  sde,  cde  ;  but  before  i  it 
has  no  accent. 

A  before  o  must  be  pronounced  and  accented  thus, 
bacalhdo  ;  but  when  the  relative  o  is  added  to  the  third 
person  singular  of  the  present  indicative,  then  a  has 
no  accent ;  as,  dma-o. 

E  before  a  is  accented  thus,  balea ;  and  sometimes 
with  the  acute,  as  assembled,  idea,  and  some  others ;  and 
sometimes  has  no  accent  at  all,  as  in  gdvea,  f^mea,  and 
some  others. 

E  before  o  is  exceedingly  sonorous  and  long,  as  in 
chape'o,  corucheo ;  except  pdteo,  ferreo,  pltimbeo,  dureo, 
argenteo. 

I  before  a,  e,  o,  is  long ;  as  dizia,  fazia,  almotolia ; 
except  such  as  are  borrowed  from  the  Latin ;  as,  ne&cia, 
comedia,  fe'ria,  sciencia,  prudencia,  and  sdbia,  when  an 
adjective,  <kc.  /  before  o  and  e  is  long;  as,  desvie,  desvio-, 
except  vicio,  and  some  others. 

0  before  a  is  accented  thus,  coroa,  toa,  moa,  esmoa. 

0  before  e  is  long  in  the  words  d6e,  m6e,  r6e,  and 
in  the  verb  soe,  when  it  signifies  to  be  wont ;  but  when  it 
signifies  to  sound,  it  is  to  be  accented  thus,  sde. 


248  ETYMOLOGY. 

U before  a  is  long;  as,  rua,  charrua;  except  melttfiua, 
insua. 

U  before  e  and  o  is  long ;  as,  concluo,  recuo,  conclue, 
recue  ;  except  mellifluo,  and  some  others  derived  from  the 
Latin. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE  POKTUGUESE  TONGUE 
FKOM  THE  LATIN. 

THE  Portuguese  has  so  great  an  affinity  to  the  Latin, 
that  several  words  of  the  latter  are  preserved  in  the 
former,  by  only  allowing  a  small  alteration ;  as  may 
easily  be  seen  in  the  following  observations  : — 

1 .  The  o  of  the  Latin  words  is  preserved  in  some  of  the 
Portuguese  :  some  Latin  words  are  entirely  preserved  in 
the  Portuguese ;  as,  hospede,  corda,  porta,  <fec. 

2.  The  u  is  changed  into  o ;  as,  forca,  goloso,  estopa, 
mosca,    anamos,    &c.,    from  furca,   gulosus,  stupa,  musca, 
anamus,  &c. 

3.  The  diphthong  au  is  frequently  changed  into  ou ; 
as,  louvavel,  ouro,  couve,  mouro,  &c.,  from  laudabilis,  durum, 
caulisj  maurus,  &c. 

4.  The  e  is  preserved  in  several  Portuguese  words ; 
as,  certOj  servo,  erva,  terra,  ferro,  &c.,  from  certus,  servus, 
htrba,  terra,  ferrum,  &c. 

5.  The  e  takes  the  place  of  i;  as,  enfermo,  seco,  &c., 
from  infirmus,  siccus,  &c.;  and  the  i  is  sometimes  pre- 
served;   as   in    indigno,    benigno,    &c.,    from    indignus, 
benignus,  &c. 


ETYMOLOGY.  C4 

6.  The  b  is  also  changed  into  v;  as,  arvore,  duvidar, 
dever,  estava,    amava,   &c.,    from   arbor,  dubitare,  debere, 
stabat,  amabat,  &c. 

7.  The  c  is  very  often  changed  into  g ;  as,  digo,  agudor 
amigo,  migalhi,  &c.,  from  dico,  acutus,  amicus,  mica,  <fec. 

8.  Cl  is  changed  into  ch ;   as,   chamar,   chave,  from 
clamare,  clavis,  &c. 

9.  When  the  c  in  Latin  is  followed  by  t,  this  letter  is 
changed  into  $  ;  as,  accao,  dic$ao,  &c. ,  from  actio,  dictio,  <fec. : 
and  sometimes  the  c  before  t  is  changed  into  i ;  as,  feito, 
leito,  noite,  leite,  peito,  &c.,  from/ac^ws,  lectum,  nocte,  lacte, 
pectus,  &c.     Finally,  both  the  c  and  t  are  preserved  in  a 
great   number  of  words  ;  as,  acto,  afflicto,  distincto,  &c., 
from  actus,  afflictus,  distinctus,  &c. 

10.  The  d  is  often   omitted ;  as,   roer,  excluir,  raio, 
<fec.,  from  rodere,  excludere,  radius,  &c. 

11.  The/  is  frequently  preserved  ;  as  in  fillio,  fazer, 
fervor,  formoso,  <fec.,  from  filius,  facere,  fervor,  formdsus, 
<fec. 

12.  The  g  is  changed  into  i ;  as,  reino,  from  regnum. 
Sometimes    it  is   omitted  ;  as  in  dedo,  frio,  setta,  sinal, 
bainha,  &c.,  from  digitus,  frigus,  sagitta,  signum,  vagina, 
<feo. 

13.  The   h  is  used  instead  of  the  I ;  as,  alho,  from 
allium.     Sometimes  it  is  added;  as,  artelho,  alheo,  folha, 
conselho,  &c.,  from  articulus,  alienus,  folium,  consilium,  &c. 

14.  The  n  is  sometimes  added,  and  sometimes  taken 
off;  as,  mancha,  ilka,  salitre,  esposo,  from  macula,  insula, 
sal  nitrum,  sponsus,  &c. 

15.  The  mn  is  preserved  by  many  Portuguese  writers 
in  the  words  alumno,  calumnia,  columna,  damno,  solemne, 
somno,  from  alumnus,  calumnia,  columna,  damnum,  (fee. 

16.  The  double  n  of  the  Latin  is  preserved  in  several 
words ;  as  in  anno,  innocencia,  innocuo,  innavegavel,  innovar, 


250  ETYMOLOGY. 

connexo,  &c.,  from  annus,  innocentia,  innocuus,  innavigabilis, 
innovare,  connexus,  &c. 

1 7.  The  gn  and  gm  are  preserved  in  several  Portuguese 
words  ;  as  in  augmento,  fragmento,  enigma,  benigno,  digno, 
indigno,  ignominia,  &c.,  from   augmentum,  fragmentum, 
enigma,  benignus,  dignus,  &c. 

18.  The  e  and  the  i  after  n  are  sometimes  changed 
into  h;  as  in  aranka,  vinha,   Hispanha,  castanha,   &c., 
from  aranea,  mnea,  Hispania,  castanea,  &c. 

19.  The  p  is  changed  into  b ;  as  in  cobra,  cabello, 
cabe$a,  <fec.,  from  capra,  capillus,  caput,  &c.     Sometimes  pi 
is  changed  into  ch ;  as,   chaga,  ckoro,   chuva,  &c.,  from 
plaga,  ploro,  pluvia,  &LC. 

20.  The  q  is  changed  into  g  ;  as,  igual,  alguem,  antigo, 
agoa,    aguia,  &c.,  from    cequus,    aliquis,    antiquus,    aqua, 
aquila,  &c. 

21.  The  t  is  likewise  changed  into  d;  as,  cadea,  fado, 
I  ado,  nadar,  piedade,  &c.,  from  catena,  fatum,  latus,  natare, 
pietas,  &c.     The  ti  of  the  Latin  is  sometimes  changed  into 
fa,  and  sometimes  into  ci  ;  as  in  gra$a,  clemencia,  pacien- 
cia,  &c.,  from  gratia,  dementia,  patientia,  &c. 

Note.  All  these  alterations  are  not  general  in  all  the 
words,  but  are  used  in  several ;  and  on  some  occasions  the 
Latin  word  is  preserved  without  any  change  or  variation. 
And  as  it  would  be  endless  to  pretend  to  show  all  the 
affinity  between  the  Portuguese  and  the  Latin,  I  shall  only 
observe  that  they  sometimes  add,  and  sometimes  take  off, 
letters  from  the  Latin  roots ;  as  in  facil,  debil,  final, 
material,  estrepito,  estomago,  expectador,  especular,  &c. 
from  facilis,  debilis,  finalis,  strepitus,  spectator,  &c. 


251 


PART  III. 


THE    DIFFERENT    IDIOMS    OF   ANDAR,    TO    GO. 


Andar  a  pe 
Andar  a  cavallo 
Andar  pela  rua 
Andar  em  cocke 
Andar  embarcado 
Andar  de  bolina 
Andar  para  diante 
Andar  para  traz 
Andar  atraz  de  algum 


Andar  de  vagar 
Andar  com  o  tempo 
Andar  per  dido 
Andar  de  pe 

Andar  com  hour  a 

Anda 

Anda  para  diante 

Andar  de  pandega 

Andar  de  mal  a  peior 

Andar  de  reixa  com  alguem 

Com  o  andar  do  tempo 

Andar  de  galope 

Andar  em  corpo 

Anda  o  mundo  as  avessas 


To  go  on  foot 

To  ride  on  horseback 

To  walk  in  the  street 

To  ride  in  a  coach 

To  sail 

To  sail  with  a  side  wind 

To  go  forward 

To  go  backward 

To  go  behind  or  after  one, 
also  to  follow,  to  press,  to 
solicit  a  person 

To  go  wandering 

To  go  with  the  times 

To  go  astray 

To  be  poorly,  but  not  bed- 
ridden 

To  act  honestly 

Go 

Go  on 

To  carouse 

To  grow  worse  and  worse 

To  bear  one  a  grudge 

In  the  course  of  time 

To  gallop 

To  be  uncloaked 

The  world  has  come  about 


252 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Andar  trabalhando  rfalguma 

obra 

Andar  contents 
Andar  dizendo 


To  be  about  some  piece  of 

work 

To  go  pleased 
To  publish  or  report 


THE    DIFFERENT    IDIOMS    OF    DAR   AXD    DAR-SE. 


Dar 

Dar  a  entender 

Dar  fe 

Dar  or  vender  flado 

Dar  d  luz 

Dar-se  a  partido 

Dar  palavra 

Dar  utna  salva 

Dar  Jlador 

Dar  principio  or  Jim 

Dar  conta 

Dar-se,  ao  estudo 

Dar  em  que  foliar 

Dar  entrada 

Dar  causa 

Dar  que  entender 

Dar  de  beber 

Dar  vozes 

Dar  um  coscorrdo 

Dar  palmadas 

Dar  caucao 

Daro  faro  de  alguma  coisa 

a  alguem 

Dar  uma  estocada 
Dar  os  bons  dias 
Dar  a  guardar 


To  give,  to  strike 

To  give  to  understand 

To  credit,  to  believe 

To  sell  upon  credit 

To  publish,  to  be  confined 

To  side  with  one 

To  promise 

To  fire  a  volley 

To  bail 

To  begin  or  to  end 

To  give  an  account 

To  apply  oneself  to  study 

To  give  room  for  talking 

To  give  access  to 

To  give  cause 

To  vex  one  sadly,  to  trouble 
one 

To  give  drink 

To  cry  out 

To  give  a  box  on  the  ear 

To  clap  hands 

To  give  security 

To  give  a  hint  about  some- 
thing 

To  give  a  thrust 

To  bid  one  good  morning 

To  give  to  keep 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


253 


Dar  emprestado 
Dar  com  alguem 

Dar  em  alguem 

Dar  cartas 

Dar  sobre  o  inimigo 

Dar  os  parabens 

Dar  os  parabens  a  alguem  da 

sua  chegada 
Dar  a  mao  ajudando 
Dar  a  escolher 
Dar  enfado  a  alguem 
Dar  no  alvo 
Dar  as  costas 

Dar  pelo  amor  de  Deos 
Dar  uma  volta  em  redondo 
Dar  uma  vista  de  olhos 
Dar  alcance  ao  que  se  deseja 
Dar  suspiros 
Dar  ouvidos 
Dar  em  rosto 

Ddcd 

Deu-me  uma  dor 
Dar  que  fazer  a  alguem,  or 
occupar  alguem 

Dar  horas 

0  relogio  da  h6ras 

Dar  a  alma  a  Deus 

Dar  comsigo  emalgumaparte 

Dar  de  jantar 


To  lend 

To  meet  with  one  by  chance, 

to  light  upon  a  person 
To  strike  one 
To  deal  or  give  the  cards 
To  fall  upon  the  enemy 
To  congratulate 
To  bid  one  welcome 

To  give  a  helping  hand 

To  let  one  take  his  choice 

To  molest  one 

To  hit  the  mark 

To   run    away,   to    betake 

oneself  to  flight 
To  give  for  God's  sake 
To  turn  round 
To  cast  a  glance 
To  compass  one's  wish 
To  sigh 

To  give  hearing 
To  upbraid,  to  cast  in  the 

teeth 

Give  hither 

[  was  taken  with  a  pain 
To  employ  one,  to  set  him 

at  work,  to  set  him  upon 

some  business 
To  strike  (hours) 
The  clock  strikes 
To  die 
To  cast  oneself  into  a  place, 

or  to  go  to  a  place 
To  give  some  dinner 


254 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


0  sol  dd  nos  olhos 

Dar  razoes 

Dar  comsigo  no  cMo 

Dar  fruto 

Dar  as  mdos 

Dar  com  a  porta  na  cara  de 

alguem 
Dar  pressa 
Esta  travessa  vai  dar  d  rua 

larga 

Dei  no  pensamento  de,  &c. 
Nao  sabe  aonde  ha  de   dar 

comsigo 
Isto  vos  ha  de  dar  muito  que 

fazer 

Dar  com  o  corpo  em  terra 
Dar  em  todos,  or  dizer  mat  de 

todos 

Dar  conta  de  si 
Dar  d  conta 
Eu  darei  conta  d'isso 
Elle  deu  em  ir  dquelle  lugar 
Dar  uma  broma  a  alguem 
Dar-se  por  cidpado 

De  nenhuma  sorte  vos  deis  por 

entendido 

Dar-se  por  aggravado 
Dar-se  por  satisfeito 
Dar-se  por  vencido 


Dar-se  por  desentendido 


The  sun  shines  in  one's  eyes 

To  debate  or  contend 

To  fall  upon  the  ground 

To  bear  fruit 

To  shake  hands 

To  shut  the  door  upon  one 

To  press  or  hasten 

This   lane   strikes,  or  goes 

into,  the  broad  street 
It  came  into  my  head  to,  &c. 
He  does  not  know  where  to 

£0 
This  will  give  you  a  great 

deal  of  trouble 
To  fall  down 
To  speak  ill  of  everybody 

To  give  account  of  oneself 

To  pay  on  account 

I  will  accomplish  that 

He  began  to  use  that  place 

To  jest  with  some  one 

To   acknowledge   oneself 

guilty 
Take  no  notice  of  anything 

To  make  a  show  of  anger 

To  rest  satisfied 

To  submit,  to  surrender 
oneself  a  prisoner,  or  to 
yield  a  point 

To  fain  oneself  ignorant,  to 
to  take  no  notice  of  any- 
thing 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


255 


Quando  se  der  a  occasido 
Dar-se  pressa 

Elle  deu-se  a  toda  a  sorte  de 

vicios 

Que  se  vos  da  a  vos  d'isso  ? 
Pouco  se  me  da, 
Nao  se  me  dd  nada 
Elles  ddo-se  muito  bem 

Estacame  noose  dd  bem  par  a 
isso 


When  occasion  shall  require 

it 
To  be   in   haste,  to   make 

haste 

He  gave  himself  up  to  all 
manner  of  vices 

What  is  that  to  you  ? 

I  care  but  little 

I  care  nothing  at  all 

They  agree  very  well  to- 
gether 

This  meat  is  not  good  for 
that 


OP   THE   DIFFERENT   IDIOMS   OF   THE   VERB    ESTAR. 

We  use  the  verb  estar  to  make  an  action  of  repose,  by 
putting  the  verb  that  follows  in  the  gerund  ;  as,  elle  estd 
escrevendo,  he  is  writing. 

Estar  has  several  other  significations ;  as, 


Estar  em  pe 

Estar  bem  or  mal 

Estar  assentado 

Estar  para  sahir 

Estar  com  o  sentido  em  outra 

parte 

Estd  muito  bem 
Estd  para  chover 
Estar  para  cahir 
Estar  para  morrer 
Estar  em  duvida 
Estaremos  a  ver 
Estar  mao  sobre  mao 


To  stand  upright 

To  be  well  or  ill 

To  be  sitting 

To  be  just  going  out 

To  have  one's  wits  a-wool- 

gathering 

It  is  well,  it  is  very  well 
It  is  going  to  rain 
To  be  ready  to  fall 
To  be  on  the  point  of  death 
To  be  in  doubt 
We  will  expect  the  issue 
To  stand  idle 


256 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Estar  em  casa 

Aquillo  ndo  me  estd  bem 

Estar  dormido 

Estar fazendo 

Estar  de  nojo 

Estar  dlerta 

Estar  de  sentinella 

Estar  alegre 

Elle  estd  como  quer 

Estar  em  perigo 

Estar  encostado 

Estar  esperando 

Estar  muito  tempo 

Estar  calado 

Estar  or  viver  com  outros 

Estar  por  cima 

Estar  debaixo 

Estar  bem  aviado 

Estar  d  espera 

Estar  enamorado 

Estar  de  cama 

Estar  no  campo 

Estar  com  saude,  or  de  saude 

Estar  quieto 

Estar  neutral 

Estarei  por  tudo  o  que   vos 

parecer  mais  conveniente 
A  difficuldade  estd  em,  &c. 
Estar  por  alguem 

Estar  por  or  em  lugar  de,  &c. 
Elle  estava  naaltura  do  Cabo 
de  Boa  Esperan$a 


To  be  at  home 

That  does  not  become 

well 

To  be  asleep 
To  be  doing 
To  be  in  mourning 
To  be  upon  one's  guard 
To  stand  sentry 
To  be  merry 
He  lives  in  clover 
To  be  in  danger 
To  lean  upon 
To  expect 

To  stay  a  good  while 
To  be  silent 
To  dwell  with  others 
To  lie  over 
To  lie  under 
To  be  in  a  bad  plight 
To  lie  in  wait 
To  be  in  love 
To  be  bedridden 
To  be  in  the  country 
To  be  in  health 
To  stand  still,  or  to  be  quiet 
To  stand  neuter 
I  shall   stand  to  whatever 

you  shall  think  proper 
The  difficulty  consists  in,  &c. 
To  stand  for  one,  to  be  of 

his  side 

To  stand  for  or  signify,  «fec. 
He   stood  off  the   Cape  of 

Good  Hope 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


257 


Eu  nao  quero  estar  a  razoes 

comvosco 

Estd  quanta  quizeres 
Aonde  estais? 
Estareipelo  que  disser  apessoa 

que  for  de  vosso  agrado 
Nao  podemos  estar  por  isso 
Nao  quero  estar  pelas  vossas 

razoes 
Como  estd  vmce  ? 


I  will  not  quarrel  or  dispute 

with  you 

Stay  as  long  as  it  may  please 
Where  are  you  ?  [thee 

I  will  refer  it  to  whom  you 

please 

We  cannot  stand  to  that 
I  will  not  take  your  judg- 
ment 
How  do  you  do,  sir? 


Estar,  joined  with  the  infinitive  of  a  verb  and  the 
particle  para,  signifies  to  be  ready,  or  about  doing  a 
thing,  which  has  always  reference  to  the  signification  of 
the  verb ;  as, 


Esto\t  para  ir 

Estou  para  comprar  um  cavallo 

Estou  para  cazar-me 

Esta  casa  estd  para  cahir 

Estou  para  dizer 

Estar    com   a    boca    aberta 

(metaphor) 
Estar  de  dieta 
Estar  fiado  em  alguem 

Estar  no  f undo 
Estar  de  fronte 
Estar  em  competencia 
Estar  ao  lume 
Estar  de  longe 
Estar  alto 

Estar    d     mdo    direita    de 
alguem 


I  am  going,  I  am  ready  to  go 
I  am  about  buying  a  horse 
I  am  going  to  be  married 
This  house  is  ready  to  fall 
I  dare  say 
To  stare,  to  look,  to  hearken 

attentively 
To  keep  to  a  diet 
To  trust  to,  to  rely,  or  de- 
pend upon  one 
To  lie  at  the  bottom 
To  lie  over  against 
To  stand  in  competition 
To  stand  by  the  fire 
To  stand  at  a  distance 
To  stand  high  or  in  a  high 

place 

To  be  at  one's  right  hand, 
to  have  the  first  place 
a 


258 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Elle    esteve    em    perigo    de     He  was  like  to  be  drowned 

afogar-se 
Nao  estar  no  caso  de,  &c.  Not  to  be  able,  or  in  case  of, 


Estar  d  ordem  de  alguem 
Isso  ndo  estd  nos  termos 

Ndo  estou  no  caso 
Estar  d  razoes 

Estar  bem  com  alguem 

Estar  bem 

Bem   aviado  estaria   eu,   se 

&c. 
Estar  em  conceito  de  homem 

honrado 
Estar  na  fe  de 

JZstar  de  posse 

Deixai  estar  isso 
Estar  em  si 
Estar  fora  de  si 
Deixa     estar      (a     sort    of 
threatening) 


To  be  at  one's  disposal 
That  is   not   right,   it  will 

not  do 

I  am  not  in  a  position  of 
To  contend,  to  strive,  or 

quarrel 

To  be  in  favour  with  one 
To  be  well,  to  be  at  ease 
It  would  be  very  bad  for 

me,  indeed,  if,  &c. 
To   be  looked  upon  as  an 

honest  man 
To    believe,    to    think,   or 

suppose 
To    possess,    to    have   the 

possession  of  a  thing 
Let  that  alone 
To  be  in  one's  right  wits 
To  be  out  of  one's  wits 
I  will  be  revenged  on  you, 

you  shall  pay  for  it 


We  have  already  observed  the  difference  between  ser 
-and  estar. 

OF    THE    DIFFERENT    IDIOMS    OF    FAZER   AND 

FAZER-SE. 

Fazer  signifies  to  do,  to  make,  to  create  ;   also  to  form 
of  materials  ;  also  to  feign,  to  seem,  to  pretend  as  if. 
Elle  fez  que  ndo  o  via  He  pretended  as  if  he  did 

not  see  it 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


259 


Fazer  uma  visita 
Elle  o  fez  maltratar 

Fazer  pe  atraz  (metaphor) 

Que  tendes  v6s  que  fazer  com 
isto  ? 

Fazer    alarde     de    alguma 

cousa 
Fazer  Jim  ao  clesejo 

Fazer  por  alguma  coisa 


Faqo  por  isso 

Fazer  ao  negocio  or  ao  caso 

Fazer  esmolas 

Fazer  gasto 

Fazer  gosto 

Fazer  o  gosto  or  a  vontade 

a  alguem 
Fazer  parallelo 
Fazer  fumo 

Fazer  ausencias  a  alguem 
Faz  frio 

Fazer  em  peda^os 
Fazer  zombaria  de  alguem 

Nao  fa$ais  caso  d'isso 

Fazer  agoada 

Isto  me  faz  vir  a  agoa  d  boca 


To  pay  a  visit 

He  caused  him  to  be  used 

ill 
To  fall  or  draw  back,  to  give 

ground 
What  have  you  to  do  with 

it?    or  what   is   that   to 

you? 
To  make  a  pride  of  a  thing, 

to  glory  in  it 
To   satisfy  one's    desire  or 

longing 
To  take  pains,  to  endeavour, 

to   labour  for    a   certain 

purpose,    to   work   for  a 

certain  end 
I  try  after  it 
To  come  to  the  purpose 
To  give  alms 
To  spend 

To  like,  to  be  pleased  with 
To  please  one,  to   comply 

with  one's  desires 
To  parallel,  to  compare 
To  smoke 

To  speak  of  any  one  absent 
It  is  cold 
To  pull  to  pieces 
To  mock  or  to  laugh  at  a 

person 

Do  not  mind  that 
To  take  in  fresh  water 
This     makes     my    mouth 

water 


260 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Fazer  alto 

Fazer   casa   (in  playing   at 

backgammon) 
Fazer  a  cea 
Fazer  caras 
Fazer  enredos 

Fazer  caso 

Fazer  de  valente 

Fazer  muito  caso  de  alguma 

coisa 
Nao  faro  caso  d'elle 

Fazer  festa 
Fazer  uma  festa 

Fazer  as  vezes  de  alguem 

Fazer  das  suas 

Fazer  lugar 

Fazer  merce 

Fazer  ouvidos  de  mercador 

Ter  que  fazei* 

Fazer  exercicio 

Fazer   exercicio    (a  military 

word) 
Os    soldados    estao    fazendo 

exercicio 

Que  fazeis  aqui  ? 
Fazer  um  vestido 
Fazer  uma  lei,  um  discurso 
Fazer  guerra 
Fazer  saber  alguma  cousa  a 

algmm 


on 


To  halt 

To  put  two   men 

some  point 
To  get  supper  ready 
To  make  faces 
To    form    a   secret  design 

against  another 
To  take  notice 
to  act  the  brave 
To  make  much  of  a  thing 

I  do  not  take  any  notice  of 

him 

To  caress,  to  fondle 
To  give  an  entertainment, 

to  feast 

To  act  as  a  substitute 
To  do  mischief 
To  make  room 
To  grant  a  favour 
To   appear  as  if  one   were 

deaf 

To  be  busy 
To  take  exercise 
To  drill 


The  soldiers  are  drilling 


What  are  you  doing  here  1 
To  make  a  suit  of  clothes 
To  make  a  law,  a  speech 
To  make  war 

To    make    one   acquainted 
with  a  thing 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


261 


Fazer  enraivecer  alguem 

Fazer  uma  conta 

Fazer  conta 

Elle  fazia     uma    conta,    e 

sahio-lhe  outra 
Fazer  contas  com  alguem 

Isso  nao  mefaz  conta 

Fazer  jxiusa 

Fazer  bem 

Fazer   dinheiro    de   alguma 

cousa 

Tornar  afazer 
Fazer  damno 
Ter  que  fazer  com  alguem 

Fazer  amizade 
Fazer  honra 
Fazer  fe 

Fazer-se  forte 

Fazer  men$ao 

Fazer  mat 

Fazer    de  alguem    o    que  se 

quizer 

Fazer  uma  aposta 
Faz  vento 
Faz  koje  oito  dias 
Fazer  vida  com  alguem 
Fazer  a  sua  vontade 
Fazer  o  ]iossivel 
Nao  fareis  nada  com  isso 
Nao  fa  rais  mais  assim 


To  make  one  mad 
To  cast  up  an  account 
To  intend,  or  to  propose 
He  was  much  disappointed 

To    settle    accounts    with 

one 
That  is  not  convenient  to 

me 

To  make  a  stand 
To  do  good 
To  make  money  of  a  thing, 

to  sell  it 
To  make  again 
To  do  harm 
To   deal   with   one,    or    to 

have  to  do  with  one 
To  become  friends 
To  honour 
To  make  known,  to  testify, 

to  witness 
To  fortify  oneself 
To  mention 
To  hurt 
To  dispose  of  one 

To  lay  a  wager 

The  wind  blows 

A  week  ago 

To  dwell  together 

To  do  as  one  pleases 

To  do  one's  best 

You  will  do  no  good  in  it 

Do  so  no  more 


262 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Se  tornardes  a  fazer  assim 
Desejo  que  fa$a  a  sua  for- 

tuna 
Custou-me   muito    a  fazel-o 

vir 
Fazer  a  outrem  o  que  quize- 

ramos  que  outrem  nosfizesse 

a  n6s 
Nao    tenho   que   fazer   com 

isso 

Fazer  o  que  alguem  manda 
Fazei    de    mim   o   que    vos 

parecer 

Fazer  um  grande  estrondo 
Elle  foi  o  que  fez  tudo  n'a- 

quelle  negocio 
Que  fareis  hoje  ? 
Fazer  o  seu  trabalko 
Fazer  uma  boa  casa 

Fazer  a  barba 
Fazer  a  cama 
Nao  sei  que  Ike  fazer 
Fazer  grande  negocio 
Fazer  o  seu  officio 

Fazer  profissao 
Todos  o  faziao  morto 

Fazer  vir 

Fazer  entrar,  or  sahir  alguem 

Isto  nao  faz  nada 
Nao  sei  que  fazer  d'isso 


If  ever  you  do  so  again 

I   wish   he   may  make  his 

fortune 
I  had  much  to  do  to  make 

him  come 
To  do  to  others  as  we  would 

have  to  be  done  to  us 

I  have  nothing  to  do  with 

it 

To  do  as  one  is  bid 
Do  with  me  as  you  think 

fit 

To  make  a  great  noise 
He  was  the  factotum  in  that 

business 

What  will  you  do  to-day  1 
To  do  one's  work 
To  raise,  to  set  up  a  good 

house  (business) 
To  shave 
To  make  the  bed 
I  cannot  help  it 
To  drive  a  great  trade 
To  exercise  or  discharge 

(profession) 
To  profess 
Everybody  gave  out  that  he 

was  dead 

To  call  or  send  for 
To  call  in  or  out,   to  bid 

one  come  in  or  out 
It  is  no  matter 
I  have  no  need  of  it 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Jd  ndo  ten/to  que  fazer  com 

elle 

Fazer  um  livro 
Fazer  amizade  com  alguem 

Fazer  exemplo  em  alguem,  or 
castigal-o  para  dar  ex- 
emplo 

Fazer  uma  coisa  muito  encu- 
bertamente 

Fazer  das  suas 

Elle  sempre  estd  fazendo  das 
suas 

Fazer  jurar  alguem 

Fazer  saltar,  or  voar  pelos 
ares 

Fazer  boa  vizinJianqa 

Fazer  lenJia 
Fazer  a  ronda 
Fazer  dividas 
Faz  lua 
Fazer  violencia 
Fazer-se  ao  trabalho 

Fazer-se  velho 
Fazer-se  feio 
Fazer-se  soberbo 
Faz-se  tarde 


I  have  done  with  him 

To  write  a  book 

To  make  friendship,  to  get 
into  friendship  with  one 

To  make  one  a  public  ex- 
ample 

To  do  a  thing  very  co- 
vertly 

To  play  tricks 

He  is  always  playing  his 
tricks 

To  put  one  to  his  oaths 

To  blow  up 

To  keep  on  good  terms 
with  one's  neighbours 

To  fell  wood 

To  walk  the  rounds 

To  run  in  debt 

The  moon  shines 

To  offer  violence 

To  inure  oneself  to  hard- 
ships 

To  grow  old 

To  grow  ugly 

To  grow  proud 

It  grows  late 


Fazer-se  "signifies  also  to  feign,  to  pretend,  to  seem,  to 
make  as  if. 


Faz-se  de  surdo 


He  pretends  to  be  deaf 


264  PHRASEOLOGY. 


THE    DIFFERENT    IDIOMS    OF  TER   AND    TER-SE. 


Ter  que  fazer 

Ter  odio 

Ter  par  costume 

Ter  alguem  por  ignorante 

Ter  cuidado  de 

Ter  cuidados 

Ter  fastio 

Ter  animo 

Ter  boafama 

Ter  boa  cara 

Ter  necessidade 

Ter  pressa 

Ter  muitafumaca 

Ter  grande  presumpc(do 

Ter  razao 

Ndo  ter  razao 

Ter  uma  coisa  na  ponta  da 

lingua 

Ter  feifies  feiticeiras 
Ter  mdfama 
Ter  ciumes 

Ter  meios  com  que  viver 
Ter  no  pensamento 
Ter  obriga^ao 
Ter  medo 

Ter  razao,  e  mais  que  razao 
Que  tendes  vos  com  isso  ? 
Ter  carruagem  e  criados 


To  be  busy 

To  hate 

To  be  wont 

To  believe  one  ignorant 

To  be  careful  of 

To  be  fall  of  care 

To  loathe,  to  see  food  with 
dislike 

To  have  courage 

To  be  well  spoken  of 

To  have  a  pleasant  face 

To  be  in  want 

To  be  in  haste 

To  be  very  proud 

To  presume  much  on  one- 
self 

To  be  in  the  right 

To  be  in  the  wrong 

To  have  a  thing  at  one's 
finger's  ends 

To  be  fascinating 

To  be  ill  spoken  of 

To  be  jealous  of 

To  be  well  off 

To  bear  in  mind 

To  be  obliged 

To  be  afraid 

To  be  right  enough 

What  is  that  to  you  ? 

To  keep  a  carriage  and 
servants 

To  hold  one  in  suspense 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


265 


Homem  que  tern  boa  feirdo 
Ter  mesa  franca 


Ter  frio 
Ter  por  bem 
Tenho-o  por  douto 

Ter  com  que 

Ndo     tendes     de     que     vos 

queixar 
Nao  tendes  que,  tfec. 

Jsto  ndo  tern  nada  que  fazer 

com  o  que  eu  digo 
Ter  entre  rndos 
Ten/io  isso  por  certo 
Ter  d'ir  com  alguem 

Ter  alguem  por  si 

Temos  por  nos  a  author  idade 

dos  mais  prudfntes 
Ter  para  si 
Ter  em  muito 
Ter  em  pouco 
Ter  em  boa  conta 
Ter  mao 
Ter  mao  n'alguma  coisa 


Tenha  ndo,  or  tern  mao 
Ter-se  em  pe 


A  man  of  good  address 

To  keep  open  house,  to 
keep  a  table  where  a 
man  may  come  without 
bidding 

To  be  cold 

To  approve  of 

I  consider  him  as  a  learned 
man 

To  have  wherewith 

You  have  no  reason  of 
complaint 

It  is  useless,  or  it  will  be  to 
no  purpose  for  you  to,  &c. 

That  is  nothing  to  the  pur- 
pose 

To  have  in  hand 

I  hold  that  for  a  certainty 

To  have  to  go  with  some 
one 

To  be  supported  or  pro- 
tected by  one 

The  wisest  men  are  of  our 
opinion 

To  be  of  opinion 

To  set  much  by 

To  value  but  little 

To  hold  in  great  esteem 

To  hold,  or  to  restrain 

To  bear  up,  to  support,  to 
prop,  to  keep  up,  to  hold 
up 

Hold,  stop 

To  stand,  to  stand  up 


266 

Ter-se  hem  a  cavallo 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Ndo  me  posso  ter  de  riso 
Ndo  se  pode  ter,  que  ndo  falle 


To   sit   firmly    or   well    on 

horseback 

I  cannot  forbear  laughing 
He  cannot  forbear  speaking 


THE    DIFFERENT    IDIOMS    OF    QUE  HER. 

Querer  signifies  to  ivish,  to  be  willing,  and  to  believe;  asy 


Querem  alguns 

Querer  bem 

Querer  rnal 

Antes  querer 

Queira  Deus 

Mas  quero  que  assim  seja 

Que  quer  dizer  aquelle  homem  ? 

Que  quer  dizer  isto  ? 

Isto  quer  dizer  que,  &c. 

Eu  quero  absolutamente  que, 

&c. 

Eu  assim  o  quero 
Elle  quer  que  v6s  obedecais 
Ndo  quero 

Elle  o  fard  quando  quizer 
Elle  quer  partir  dmanhd 

0  mal  que  eu  Ike  quero  me 
venha  a  mim 


Some  believe 

To  love 

To  hate 

To  have  rather 

God  grant  it 

I  grant  it,  suppose  it  were  so 

What  does  that  man  mean? 

What  means  this  ? 

This  means  that,  &c. 

I  positively  resolve  that,  &c. 

I  will  have  it  so 
He  will  have  you  obey 
I  will  not 

He  will  do  it  when  he  pleases 
He   wants   to    set   out   to- 
morrow 

I  wish  him  no  more  barm 
than  I  do  to  myself 


HAVER,  TO  HAVE. 


Tu  has-de  ir 
Elle  ha-de  vir  hoje 
Se  eu  houver  de  ir 


You  must  go 

He  is  to  come  to-day 

If  I  shall  be  obliged  to  go 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


267 


Aindaque  isso  me  kouvesse  de 

custar  a  vida 

Haveis  vos  de  estar  em  casa  ? 
Eu  hei-de  achar^ne  Id 
Elle  ha-de  ser  bom 
Eu  hei-de  receber  dinheiro 
Vos  e  que  liaveis  de  jogar 
Aquillo  e  que  vos  havieis  de 

fazer 

Haver  por  bem 
Haver  por  mat 
Que  ha-de  ser 
Aquillo  nunca  Jia-de  ser 
Para  haver  defallar,ouvir,&Q, 
Que  ha-de  ser  de  mim  ? 
Livros  do  deve,  e  ha-de  haver 
Haver  mister 
Ha  mister  apressar-se 


Though  I  were  to  lose  my 

life  for  it 

Shall  you  be  at  home  ? 
I  must  be  there 
He  must  be  good 
I  am  to  receive  money 
It  is  your  turn  to  play 
You  should  do  that 

To  take  in  good  part 
To  take  in  ill  part 
That  is  to  be  hereafter 
That  will  never  happen 
In  order  to  speak,  hear,  &c. 
What  is  to  become  of  me  1 
Books  of  debtor  and  creditor 
To  want 
It  is  necessary  to  make  haste 


Haver,  when  impersonal,  is  rendered  into  English  by 
the  verb  to  be,  preceded  by  there;  as, 


Ha 

Ha  homens  tao  malvados 

Havia  uma  mulher 

Ha  alguns  bons,    e   outros 

mdos 

Ha  muitas  casas 
Ha  alguma  coisa  de  novo  ? 
Ha  mais  de  uma  hora 
Ha  muito  tempo 
Ha  perto  de  uma  hora  que 

elle  sahio 
Ha  um  anno 
Ha  oito  dias 


There  is  or  there  are 
There  are  men  so  wicked 
There  was  a  woman 
There  are  some  good  and 

some  bad 

There  are  several  houses 
Is  there  any  news  ? 
It  is  more  than  an  hour  since 
Long  since 
It  is  almost  an  hour  since 

he  went  out 

« 

A  year  ago 
Eight  days  ago 


268 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Ha  perto   de  20  legoas  da 

qui  Id 
Nao  ha 
Haver-se,  v.  r. 
Elle  sabe  como  se  ha  de  haver, 

or   elle   sabe  como  ha   de 

haver-se 
Elle  houve-se  de  maneira  que, 

&c. 


It    is    nearly    20    leagues 

thither 
There  is  not 
To  behave  oneself 
He  knows   how  to  behave 

himself 

He  behaved  himself  in  such 
a  manner  that,  &c. 


Note. — When  this  verb  is  used  impersonally,  it  requires 
the  particle  de,  as  follows: 


Ha-se  mister  de  dinheiro 
Ha-de-se  fazer,  or  dizer,  isto 
Ha-de-se  fazer    o    que    elle 
quizer 


Money  is  wanted 
This  must  be  done  or  said 
People   must   do   what   he 
pleases 


Ir,  a  neuter  and  irregular  verb,  to  go,  to  walk,  to  march; 
also  to  grow,  to  reach  any  estate  gradually,  to  be  going. 


Ir  por  mar  e  por  terra 
Como  vao  os  vossos  negocios  ? 
Tudo  vai  bem 
As  suas  cousas  vao  muito  mal 

Ir  d  mdo 
Ir  andando 


Ir  passando 


Onde  vai  ? 

Onde  vai  isto  a  dar  comsigo  1 


To  travel  by  sea  and  land 
How  go  your  concerns  ? 
All  is  well,  all  goes  on  well 
Things  go  very  ill  (or  very 

hard)  with  him 
To  hinder,  to  obstruct 
To  go  on  or  forward,  to  keep 

or  hold  on  his  way ;  also 

to  proceed,  to  continue  on, 

to  prosecute 
To   shift,  to   pass   life  not 

quite  well,  to  live,  though 

with  difficulty 
Where  are  you  going  1 
What  of  all  this? 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


269 


Ir  para  baixo 
Ir  para  cima 
Quanta  mais  vamos  para  a 

primavera,mais  compridos 

sdo  os  dias 
Ir  de  mat  para  peor 
Ir  diante 
Ir  por  diante 
Ir  ao  encontro 
Ir  ao  /undo 
Ir  e  vir 
Nao  fa$o  mais  do  que  ir  e 

voltar 

Isso  jd  la  vai 
Ei-lo  Id  vai 

Que    vos   parece    d'aquella 
mulher?  ei-lo  vai,  ella  nao 
e  feia 
Como  as  cousas  agora  vao 

Por  que  parte  ides  ? 

Deus  vd  comvosco 

Ir  d  roda  do  mundo 

Ir  com  alguem 

Esta  travessa  vai  at£  d  rua 

larga 

Eu  o  irei  ver  de  caminho 
Ir  continuando  o  sen  caminho 
Ir  fora  do  sen  caminho 
Ir  um  de  uma  banda,  e  outro 

da  outra 
Ir  para  traz 
Ir  detraz 
Ir  atraz  de  alguem 


To  go  down 
To  go  up 

The  nearer  the  spring  the 
longer  the  days 

To  grow  worse  and  worse 

To  go  before 

To  go  on  or  forward 

To  go  to  meet 

To  sink  or  fall  to  the  bottom 

To  go  to  and  fro 

I  will  not  stay,  I  shall  be 

back  presently 
It  is  a  thing  past  and  done 
There  he  goes 
How    do     you     like     that 

woman  1   there  she  goes, 

she  is  not  ugly 
As  things  go  now,  as  the 

world  goes 

Which  way  do  you  go  1 
God  go  with  you 
To  go  round  the  world      v 
To  go  along  with  one 
This   lane   leads    into    the 

broad  street 

I  will  call  upon  him  as  I  go 
To  go  along  [along 

To  go  out  of  one's  way 
To  go  separately 

To  go  backward 

To  go  behind 

To  pursue,  to  go  after  one 


270 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Ir  ao  alcance  dc  alguem 

Ir  buscar 
Ir  para  dentro 
Ir  para  fora 
Ir  peregrinando 
Ir  ver,  cantar,  &c. 
Ir  fazer  um  negocio 
Ir  com  a  mare 
Ir  par  a  par  com  alguem 
Vai  para  quatro  meses  que 
eu  aqui  cheguei 

Ide  em  paz 

O  tempo  vai  abrandando 

Ir  (at  cards) 

Ir-se,  v.  r. 


Ir-se  o  enjermo 

A  quaresma  vai-se  acabando 

Ir-se 

i 

Nada  se  vai  mais   depressa 

que  o  tempo 
Aquellas  nuvens  vdo-se  escu- 

recendo 
Ir-se  embora 
Esperai  ate  que  a  calma  se 

vd  embora 
Vai-te  embora  ;  que  ndo  sales 

enganar  a  gente 
Vai-se  fazendo  tarde 
Vai-se  chegando  a  noite 


To  go  after  one,  in  or 

overtake  him 
To  go  for  or  fetch 
To  go  in 
To  go  out 

To  go  on  a  pilgrimage 
To  go  to  see,  to  sing,  &c. 
To  go  upon  a  business 
To  go  with  the  tide 
To  go  side  by  side  with  one 
It   is  now    going   on   four 

months     since     I    came 

hither 

Depart  in  peace 
The  weather  grows  mild 
To  go,  to  lay,  to  stake,  to  set 
To  go,  to  go  away,  to  go 

one's  way,  to  depart,  also 

to  run  or  leak 
The  sick  man  to  die 
Lent  draws  to  an  end 
To   slip   or   pass   away  (as 

time) 
Nothing  goes  faster    than 

time 
Those  clouds   are   growing 

dark 

To  go  away,  also  to  be  over 
Stay  till  the  heat  is  over 

Away  or  go,  you  know  not 

how  to  wheedle  people 
It  grows  late 
The  night  draws  on 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


271 


Vai-se  chegando  o  tempo  da 

sega 
Vai-se   acabando  minha  pa- 

ciencia 

Jr-se  escapulindo 
Ir-se  d  mdo 


It  grows  near  harvest 


My   patience   is  nearly  ex- 

hausted 
To  sneak  away 
To  refrain,    to   forbear,    to 

abstain 

Ir-se,  to  go  away,  impersonal  ;  as,  vdi-set  he  goes  away  ; 
foi-se,  he  went  away  ;  ir-se-ha,  he  shall  go  away. 

TO    PRAY. 


SenJior,  como  amigo,  fa<°a-me 

o  favor 

Eu  vos  pe$o,  or  peg  o  vos 
Peqo-lhe  em  cortesia 
Pecfo-lhe  encarecidamente 

Pec(o-lhe  por  favor  que,  &c. 
Fa$a-me  afineza 
Perso-lhe  perddo 


Dear  sir,  do  me  the  favour 

I  pray  you 

I  beseech  you 

I  entreat  or  conjure  you  to 

do  it 

I  beg  of  you  that,  &c. 
Do  me  the  kindness 
I  beg  your  pardon 


EXPRESSIONS   OF   KINDNESS. 


Minka  vida 

Minha  alma 

Men  amor 

Men  querido,  minha  querida 

Men  coracfio 

Filho  do  men  coraqao 

Filha  da  minha  alma 


My  life 

My  soul 

My  love 

My  dear 

My  dear  love,  my  love 

My  dear  boy 

My  dear  girl 


TO   SHOW   CIVILITY. 

A(/rade$o  a  vmce  I  thank  you 

Don  a  vmce  os  agradecimen-  I  give  you  thanks 
tos 


272 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Beijo  as  mdos  de  vmce 
Fal-o-hei  com  todo  o  gosto 
Com  todo  o  men  cora^do 
De  muito  boa  vontade 
Veja .  vmce  se  o  posso  servir 

n'alguma  cousa 
Disponha     vmce     como     Ike 

parecer  d'este  sen  criado 
Estou  esperando  2)elas  ordens 

de  vmce 

Jd  que  vmfe  assim  o  ordena 
As  ordens  de  vmcf 
Fico  muito  obrigado  a  vmce 

Quer  vmce  que  eu  faqa  alguma 

coisa  ? 

Sem  ceremonia  * 

Ndo  tern  vmce  mais  que  foliar 
Faca-me  a  honra  de  me  pw 

aos  pes  da  senhora 
Ndo    sei   como    agradecer  a 

vmfe  tantos  favores 

Ndo  sou  de  cumprimentos 
Deixemos  estes  cumprimentos 

Isso  e  o  melhor 


I  kiss  your  hand 

I  will  do  it  cheerfully 

With  all  my  heart 

Heartily,  willingly 

See  if  it  is  in  my  power  to 

serve  you 
Do  what  you  please    with 

your  servant 
I  wait  for  your  commands 

Since  you  will  have  it  so 

At  your  service 

I  am  very  much  obliged  to 
you 

Have  you  an}*thing  to  com- 
mand me  ? 

Without  ceremony 

You  need  but  speak 

Present  my  respects,  or 
duty,  to  my  lady 

I  know  not  how  to  make  a 
proper  return  for  so  many 
favours 

I  am  not  for  ceremonies 

Away  with  these  ceremonies 
or  compliments 

That  is  the  best  way 


TO    GIVE    TOKENS    OF    AFFIRMATION,    CONSENT,    BELIEF, 
AND    REFUSAL. 


E  verdade 

E  isso  verdade  ? 

E  muito  verdade 


It  is  true 

Is  it  true  1 

It  is  but  too  true 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


273 


Para  dizer-vos  a  verdade 
Com  effeito  e  assim 
•Quern  duvida  d'isso  1 
Ndo  ha  duvida  n'isso 
Parece-me  que  sim,  que  ndo 

Ap6sto  que  sim 
Apdsto  que  ndo 
Creia-me  vmce 
Estd  vmce  zombando  ? 
Falla  vmce  de  veras  ? 
Fallo  de  veras 
Pois  estdfeito 
Pouco  a  pouco 
Isso  ndo  e  verdade 
Ndo  ha  tal  coisa 
E  mentira 
Estava  zombando 
Seja  muito  embora 
Ndo  quero 


To  tell  you  the  truth 

Really  it  is  so 

Who  doubts  it  ? 

There  is  no  doubt  of  it 

I  think  so,  I  do  not  think 

so 

I  lay  it  is 
I  lay  it  is  not 
Do  believe  me 
Are  you  jesting  ? 
Are  you  in  earnest  ? 
I  am  in  earnest 
Well,  let  it  be  so 
Little  by  little 
That  is  not  true 
There  is  no  such  thing 
It  is  false 
I  did  but  jest 
Let  it  be  so 
I  will  not 


TO  CONSULT. 


Que  se  ha  de  fazer  ? 

Que  faremos  ? 

Que  the  parece  a  vmee  que  eu 


Que  remedio  tern  isso  ? 

Fa$amos  assim 
Facamos  uma  coisa 
Sera  melhor  que 
Seria  melhor  que 
Esperai  um  pouco 


What  is  to  be  done  1 

What  shall  we  do  ? 

What  do  you  advise  me  to 

do? 
What  remedy  is  there  for 

it? 

Let  us  do  so 
Let  us  do  one  thing 
It  will  be  better  that 
It  would  be  better  that 
Stay  a  little 

T 


274 

Deixai-me  com  isso 
Antes  quizera 
Se  isso  fosse  commigo 
Tudo  e  o  mesmo 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Let  me  alone 
I  had  rather 
Were  that  with  me 
It  is  all  one 


OF   EATING   AND    DRINKING. 


Tenho  fome 

Morro  de  fome 

Coma  vmce  alguma  coisa 

Que  quer  vmce  comer  ? 

Quer  vmce  comer  mais  ? 

Tenho  sede 

Jd  matei  a  fome 

Tenho  muita  sede 

Morro  de  sede 

De-me  de  beber 

Eu  beberia  um  copo  de  vinho 

Pois  beba  vmce 
Tenho  bebido  bastante 
Ndo  posso  beber  mais 
Jd  matei  a  sede 


I  am  hungry 

I  am  dead  hungry 

Eat  something 

What  will  you  eat  ? 

Will  you  eat  any  more  ? 

I  am  thirsty 

I  am  no  longer  hungry 

I  am  very  thirsty 

I    am    almost    dead    with 

thirst 

Give  me  something  to  drink 
I    could   drink   a  glass    of 

wine 

Drink,  then 
I  have  drunk  enough 
I  can  drink  no  more 
I  am  no  longer  thirsty,  or 

my  thirst  is  quenched 


OF    GOING,    COMING,    STIRRING,    ETC. 

Donde  vem  vmce  ? 
Para  onde  vai  vmce  ? 
Venho  de — vou  para 
Quer  vmce  subir  or  descer  ? 


Entre  vmct,  saia  vmct 
Ndo  se  mexa  d'aqui 


Whence  do  you  come  ? 
Where  are  you  going  1 
I  come  from,  I  am  going  to 
Will  you  come  up  or  come 

down? 

Come  in,  go  out 
Do  not  stir  from  hence 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


275 


Chegue-se  para  mint 
Vd-se  vm™ 
Vem  cd 

Espere  por  mim 
Nao  vd  too  depressa 
Tire-se  de  diante  de  mim 
Ndo  me  toque 
Deixe  estar  isso 
Estou  bem  aqui 
Abra  vmce  a  porta 
FecJie  a  porta 
Abra  or  feche  ajanella 

Venha  vmce  por  aqui 
Passe  por  alii 
Que  procura  vmce  ? 
Que  perdeo  vmre  ? 


Come  near  to  me 

Go  your  way,  be  gone 

Come  hither 

Wait  for  me 

Do  not  go  so  fast 

Get  out  of  my  way 

Do  not  touch  me 

Let  that  alone 

I  am  well  here 

Open  the  door 

Shut  the  door 

Open  the  window,  or  shut 

the  window 
Come  this  way 
Pass  that  way 
What  do  you  look  for  ? 
What  have  you  lost  ? 


TO    WISH    WELL    TO    A   PERSON. 


0  Ceo  vos  guarde 
Deos  vos  de  boa  fortuna 
Desejo  vos  todo  o  bem 

Deus  vos  ajude 

Deus  vos  perdoe 

Ide  com  Deus 

Ate  ver-nos 

Bom  proveito  fa$a  a  vme 

Bemdito  sejas 


Oh  Deus/ 
E  possivel ! 


Heaven  preserve  you 
God  send  you  good  luck 
I  wish  you  everything  that 

is  good 

God  assist  you 
God  forgive  you 
God  be  with  you 
Till  I  see  you  again 
Much  good  may  it  do  you 
God  bless  you 

TO    ADMIRE. 

OGod! 

Is  it  possible  ! 


276 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Quern  teria  imaginado,  crido,  Who  would  have  thought, 

ditof  believed,  said 

Que  delicia/  How  delightful ! 

Que  maravilha  !  or  gue  mi-  Oh,  strange  !  wonder  ! 

lagre  ! 

Ndo  me  maravilko  I  do  not  wonder 

Como  pode  ser  isto  ?  or  Como  How  can  that  be  ? 

e  possivel  ? 

Eis  aqui  como  sdo  as  coisas  So  goes  the  world 

d'este  mundo 


TO    SHOW    JOY    OR   DISPLEASURE. 


Que  gosto  / 

Que  gloria  I 

Que  alegriaf 

Que  contentamento  e  o  meu  / 

Que  felicidade  / 

Sinto  isso 

Sinto  isso  n'  alma 

Sinto  isso  no  coracdo 

Oh  que  desgraqa  e  a  minha  ! 

Affrontar-me  d'esta  sortef 

Assim  e  que  me  trata  ? 

Que  bella  cortesia/ 

Ndo  deveria  tratar  commigo 

d'esta  sorte 
Parece-te  bem  ? 
Olhe  como  elle  me  trata 
Olhai  o  que  elle  diz 
Peqo-lhe  que  me  deixe 
Ora  deixa-me 
Deixa-me,  vai  com  Deus 
Vai-ted'aqui,OY  vai-te  embora 


What  pleasure ! 

What  bliss ! 

What  joy  ! 

How  pleased  I  am  ! 

What  happiness  ! 

I  am  sorry  for  it 

That  touches  my  very  soul 

It  pierces  me  to  the  heart 

Oh,  how  unhappy  am  I  ! 

To  affront  me  thus  ! 

Do  you  use  me  thus  1 

Oh,  what  fine  manners  ! 

You  ought  not  to  treat  me 

thus 

Do  you  think  that  well  ? 
See  how  he  is  using  me 
Hear  what  he  says 
Pray  leave  me  alone 
Away,  away 
Go,  go,  God  be  with  yo 
Go  away 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


277 


Vai  tratar  da  tua  vida 
Ndo  me  quebres  a  cabeqa 

Jd  me  tens  dito  isso  um  cento 
de  vezes 


Go,  mind  your  own  business 
Do   not    torment    me   any 

more 
You  have  told  it  to  me  a 

hundred  times  already 


TO  CALL. 


Ouve  ! 

Onde  estds  ? 

Uma  palavra 

Duos  palavras  somente 


Hark! 

Where  art  thou 

A  word 

Only  two  words 


TO  ASK. 


Que  novas  ha  ? 
Que  e  isto  ?  que  ha? 

Onde  ides  ? 

Donde  vindes? 

Que  quereis  dizer  1 

De  que  serve  ? 

Que  vos  parece  ? 

Quern  teve  tal  atrevemento  ? 

Que  dizem  ?  que  se  diz  ? 

Como  diz  vmce  ? 

For  que  nao  me  responde  ? 


What  news  ? 

What  is  this?  what  is  the 

matter  ? 

Where  are  you  going  *? 
Whence  come  you  1 
What  do  you  mean  ? 
To  what  purpose  ? 
What  do  you  think  1 
Who  has  been  so  bold  ? 
What  do  they  say  1 
How  do  you  say  ? 
Why  do  you  not  answer  me  ? 


TO  FORBID. 


Deixai  estar  isso 
Nao  toqueis 
Ndo  digais  nada 
Guardai-vos 


Let  that  alone 
Do  not  touch 
Say  not  a  word 
Have  a  care 


278 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


OF   SPEAKING,    SAYING,    DOING,    ETC. 


Falle  vmcc  alto 

Falle  vmce  baixo 

Com  quern  falla  vmce  ? 

Falla  vmce  commigo  ? 

Falle  Ike 

Falla  vmce  Portuguez  ? 

Que  diz  vmce  ? 

Ndo  digo  nada 

Elle  nao  quer  calar-se 

Ouvi  dizer  que  .... 

Assim  m-o  disserdo 

Assim  dizem 

Assim  dizem  todos 

Quern  Ui6  disse  a  vmce  ? 

Disse-mo  o  Sr.  A. 

Pois  elle  e  que  Iho  disse  ? 

Pois  ella  e  que  o  disse  ? 

Quando  o  ouvio  vmce  dizer  ? 

Disserdo-m-o  hoje 

Ndo  posso  crel-o 

Que  diz  elle  ? 

Que  vos  disse-elle  ? 

Elle  nao  me  disse  nada 

Ndo  Ili6  diga  vmce 

Eu  Iho  direi 

Ndo  diga  nada 

Disse  vmce  aquillo  ? 

Ndo  o  disse 

Ndo  disse  vmce  assim  ? 

Que  estd  vmce  fazendo  ? 

Que  tern  vmce  feito  ? 

Ndo  faqo  nada 


Speak  loud 

Speak  low 

To  whom  do  you  speak 

Do  you  speak  to  me  1 

Speak  to  him  or  to  her 

Do  you  speak  Portuguese  ? 

What  do  you  say  ? 

I  say  nothing 

She  will  not  hold  her  tongue 

I  was  told  that  .... 

I  was  told  so 

They  say  so 

Every  one  says  so 

Who  told  it  you  ? 

Mr.  A.  told  it  me 

Did  he  tell  you  so  1 

Did  she  tell  it  ? 

When  did  you  hear  it  ? 

I  heard  it  to-day 

I  cannot  believe  it 

What  does  he  say  1 

What  did  he  say  to  you  ? 

He  said  nothing  to  me 

Do  not  tell  him  that 

I  will  tell  him  or  her  of  it 

Say  not  a  word 

Did  you  say  that  1 

I  did  not  say  it 

Did  you  not  say  so  ? 

What  are  you  doing  ? 

What  have  you  done (. 

I  do  nothing 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


279 


Nao  ten/io  feito  nada 
Tern  vmce  acabado  ? 
Que  estd  ellefazendo  ? 
Que  faz  ella  ? 

Que  quer,  or  queordena  vmc 
Que  Ike  falta  ? 


I  have  done  nothing 
Have  you  done  ? 
What  is  he  doing 
What  does  she  do  ? 
What  is  your  pleasure  1 
What  do  you  want  ? 


OF    UNDERSTANDING,    OR   APPREHENDING. 


Entende-o,  or  percebe-o  vmce 

bem? 
Percebe  vmce  o  que  elle  disse  ? 

Percebe  vmce  o  que  elle  diz  ? 

Entende-me,    or    percebe-me 

vmce? 

Entendo  a  vmce  muito  bem 
Sabe   vmce  a   linyua  Portu- 

gueza  ? 
Nao  a  sei 

Tem-me  vmce  percebido  ? 
Agora  o  percebo 
Nao  se  percebe  o  que  elle  diz 

Parece  tartamudo 


Do   you    understand    him 

(or  it)  well  1 
Do  you  understand  what  he 

said? 
Do  you  understand  what  he 

says'? 
Do  you  understand  me  1 

I  understand  you  very  well 
Do  you  understand  Portu- 
guese 1 

I  do  not  understand  it 
Did  you  understand  me  ? 
Now  I  understand  you 
One     cannot      understand 

what  he  says 
He  speaks  like  a  stammerer 


OF   KNOWING,    OR  HAVING    KNOWLEDGE    OF. 


Sabe  vmce  isso  ? 
Nao  o  sei 

Nao  sei  nada  d'isso 
Ella  bem  o  sabia 
Porventura    ndo    sabia   elle 
tool 


Do  you  know  that  1 
I  do  not  know  it 
I  know  nothing  of  it 
She  knew  it  well 
Did  he  not  know  of  it? 


280 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


Demos  que  eu  o  soubesse 
Elle  nao  saberd  nada  d'isso 
Elle  nunca  soube  nada  d'isto 

En  soube-o  primeiro,  or  antes 

que  vmce  o  soubesse 
E  isto  assim  ou  nao  ? 
Nao  que  eu  saiba 


Suppose  I  knew  it 

He  shall  know  nothing  of  it 

He   never   knew    anything 

about  this 
I  knew  it  before  you 

Is  it  so  or  not  ? 
Not  that  I  know  of 


OF    KNOWING,    OR   BEING   ACQUAINTED    WITH,    FORGETTING 
AND    REMEMBERING. 


Conhece-o  umce  ? 

Conhece-a  vmce  ? 

Conhece-os  vmce  ? 

Conhero-o  muite  bem 

Nao  os  conhe^o 

N6s  nao  nos  conhecemos 

Conhe^o-o  de  vista 

Conhe^o-a  de  nome 

Elle  conheceo-me  muito  bem 

Conhece-me  vmce  ? 

Estou  esquecido  do  sen  nome 

Esqueceu-se  vmce  de  mim  ? 

Conhece-vos  ella? 

Conhece  o  Sr.  a  vmce  ? 

Parece  que  nao  me  conhece 
0  Sr.  bem  me  conhece 

Elle  jd  me  nao  conhece 
Tenho  a   honra   de   ser  sen 

conhecido 
Lembra-se  vmce  d'isso  ? 


Do  you  know  him  ? 

Do  you  know  her1? 

Do  you  know  them  1 

I  know  him  very  well 

I  do  not  know  them 

We  do  not  know  one  another 

I  know  him  by  sight 

I  know  her  by  name 

He  knew  me  very  well 

Do  you  know  me  ? 

I  have  forgotten  your  name 

Did  you  forget  me  1 

Does  she  know  you1? 

Does  the   gentleman  know 

you? 
It    appears    he     does    not 

know  me 
The  gentleman  knows  me 

well 

He  knows  me  no  more 
I   have   the   honour  to  be 

known  to  him 
Do  you  remember  that  1 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


281 


Nao  me  lembro  d'isso 
Lembro-me  muito  bem  d'isso 


I  do  not  remember  it 

I  do  remember  it  very  well 


OF   AGE,    LIFE,    DEATH,    ETC. 


Que  idade  tern  vmee  ? 
Que  idade  tern  sen  irmdo  ? 
Tenko  vinte  e  cinco  annos 
Tern  vinte  e  dois  annos 
Vmcetem  mais  annos  doque  eu 
Que  idade  terd  vmce  ? 
E  vmce  casado  ? 
Quantas  vezes  tern  vmce  sido 

casado  ? 
Quantas  mulheres  tern  vmce 

tido  ? 
Tern  vmce  ainda  pae  e  mai  ? 

Men,  pai  morreo 

Minha  mai  morreo 

Ha  dois  annos  que  men  pai 

morreo 

Minha  mai  casou  outra  vez 
Quantos  filhos  tern  vmce  ? 

Ten/to  quatro 

Filhos  ou  filhas  ? 

Tenko  umfilho  e  tres  filhas 

Quantos  irmdos  tern  vmee  ? 

Nao  tenho  nenhum  vivo 

Todos  morreram 

Todos  havemos  de  morrer 


How  old  are  you  ? 

How  old  is  your  brother  ? 

I  am  five-and-twenty 

He  is  twenty-two  years  old 

You  are  older  than  I 

How  old  may  you  be  ? 

Are  you  married  ? 

How  often  have  you   been 

married  ? 
How  many  wives  have  you 

had1? 
Are  your  father  and  mother 

still  alive  ? 
My  father  is  dead 
My  mother  is  dead 
My  father  has    been  dead 

these  two  years 
My  mother  is  married  again 
How    many  children   have 

you? 

I  have  four 
Sons  or  daughters  1 
I  have  one  son  and  three 

daughters 
How   many   brothers    have 

you? 

I  have  none  alive 
They  are  all  dead 
We  must  all  die 


282 


Hora 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


OF    THE    WORD    HORA,    AS    A    NOUN. 


Eu  estarei  Id  dentro  de  uma 

hora 
Que  horas  sdo  ? 

Sao  sete  horas 

A  que  horas  estareis  vos  hi  ? 

As  horas  que  for  preciso 

Horas  desoccupadas 

A  ultima  hora,  or  a  hora  da 

morte 
Cada  hora 
De  hora  em  hora 
Meia  hora 
Um  quarto  de  hora 
Uma  hora  e  meia 
Perto  das  nove  horas 
Ha  uma  hora 

F6ra  de  horas 

A  tempo 

Recolher-se  a  boas  horas 
Recolher-se  fora  de  horas 
Horas  dejantar,  or  de  cear 
Perto  das  horas  de  jantar 
Ainda  estais  na  cama  a  estas 

horas ? 
0  relogio  da  horas 


An  hour,  also  a  particular 

time 
I  will  be  there  within  an 

hour 
What  is  it  o'clock  1  what  is 

the  time  ? 
It  is  seven  o'clock 
At  what  hour  or  time  will 

you  be  there  ? 
In  due  or  good  time,  at  the 

time  appointed 
Leisure  hours 
The  last  or  the  dying  hour 

Every  hour 

Hourly,  every  hour 

Half  an  hour 

A  quarter  of  an  hour 

An  hour  and  a  half 

About  nine  o'clock 

An   hour   ago,  or    an  hour 

since 
Beyond  the  hour,  or  very 

late 

In  time 

To  keep  good  hours 
To  keep  late  hours 
Dinner  or  supper-time 
About  dinner-time 
Are  you  in  bed  at  this  time 

of  the  day  ? 
The  clock  strikes 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


283 


Jd  derao  onze  horas 
Muito  a  boas  horas 
A  boas  horas 

Em  md  hora 
Toda  a  hora  que 

A  toda  hora  que  quizerdes 

Hora 

Horas  defazer  ora$ao 

Horas  de  ir  d  igreja 

Horas  de  ir  para  a  cama 

Horas  de  comer 

Jd  nao  sao  horas 

Quando    the    chegar    a  sua 

hora 

Estar  esperando  pela  sua  hora 
Nao  ver  a  hora 


Sao  horas  de,  <fec. 
Horas  canonicas 

Horas 


As  quarenta  horas 


It  struck  eleven  o'clock 

Early,  betimes 

In  good  time,  in  time,  at 
the  time  appointed 

In  an  ill  hour,  unluckily, 
unfortunately 

Whensoever,  at  what  time 
soever 

At  what  time  you  will 

Time 

Prayer-time 

Church-time 

Bedtime 

Meal-times 

The  time  is  past,  it  is  too 
late 

When  his  dying  hour  shall 
arrive 

To  wait  for  God's  time 

To  long,  to  wish  with  eager- 
ness, continued,  with  em 
or  de  before  the  thing 
desired 

It  is  time  to,  &c. 

The  set  time  for  the  clergy 
to  say  their  office 

Any  little  prayer-book,  but 
particularly  that  in 
which  is  the  office  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin 

So  they  call  the  space  of 
three  days,  in  which  the 
consecrated  Host  is  ex- 
posed and  laid  to  public 
view,  in  certain  festivals 


284 

Conta  das  horas 


PHRASEOLOGY. 


H  orography,      account 

hours 

Arte  de  dividir  o  tempo  em     Horometry 
horas 


ORA,    AS   AN    ADVERB   AND    INTERJECTION.* 


Ora,  deixa-o-ir 


Pray  let  him  go 


Ora,    deixa-te    d'estas   par-     Away  with  these  fopperies 

voices 
Ora,  deixemo-nosd'estes  cum-     Away   with    these    compli- 

primentos 

Ora,  vamos,  despacha-te 
Ora,  vamos,  ndo  ha  perigo 
Ora,     vamos,     tira,    d'aqui 

isto 

Ora,  vamos,  tern  vergonha 
Ora,  eu  ndo  posso  soffrer 

aquillo 
Ora  um,  ora  outro 


ments 

Come,  come,  make  haste 
Away,  there  is  no  danger 
Away  with  this 

Away,  for  shame 
I  cannot  bear  that 


Sometimes   one,  sometimes 

another 
Elles  ora  estdo  sobre  um  pe,     They  stand  now  on  one  foot, 

ora  sobre  outre 
Ora,  que  quer  dizer  isso  ? 


and  then  on  another 
How  now  1 

Tudo  a  que  e  bom,  deve  ser    All   that   is  good  is  to  be 
amado ;  ora,   Deus  e  in- 
finitamente  bom,  logo,  &c. 


loved ;  now  God  is  in- 
finitely good,  therefore, 
&c. 

Now,  there  was  a  sick  man 
At  present,  for  the  present, 
now,  at  this  time 

*  When  it  is  an  adverb  or  an  interjection,  it  is  now  written  ora, 
without  the  h. 


Ora,  havia  um  enfermo 
Por  ora 


285 


A    VOCABULARY 


OF 


WORDS  MOST  USED  IN  CONVERSATION. 


DO    CEO    E   DOS   ELKMENTOS. 

Deus 

Jesus  Christo 

0  Espirito  Santo 

A  Trindade 

A  Virgem 

Os  anjos 

Os  archanjos 

Os  santos 

Os  bem  aventurados 

0  ceo 

0  paraiso 

0  inferno 

0  purgatorio 

Os  ffuerubins 

Ofogo 

0  ar 

A  terra 

0  mar 

0  sol 

A  lua 

As  estrellas 

Os  raios 


OF  THE  HEAVENS  AND  THE 
ELEMENTS. 

God 

Jesus  Christ 
The  Holy  Ghost 
The  Trinity 
The  Virgin 
The  angels 
The  archangels 
The  saints 
The  blessed 
Heaven 
Paradise 
Hell 

Purgatory 
The  cherubim 
The  fire 
The  air 
The  earth 
The  sea 
The  sun 
The  moon 
The  stars 
The  rays 


286 


VOCABULARY. 


As  nuvens 
0  vento 
A  chuva 
0  trovdo 
0  relamj)ago 
A  saraiva 
0  raio 
A  neve 
A  geada 
0  gelo 
0  orvalho 
Nevoa 
0  terremoto 
0  diluvio 
0  color 
0  frio 


The  clouds 

The  wind 

The  rain 

The  thunder 

The  lightning 

The  hail 

The  thunderbolt 

The  snow 

The  frost 

The  ice 

The  dew 

Fog  or  mist 

The  earthquake 

The  deluge  or  flood 

The  heat 

The  cold 


DO   TEMPO. 

0  dia 

A  noite 

Meio  dia 

Meia  noite 

A  manhd 

Uma  kora 

Um  quarto  de  hora 

Meia  hora 

Tres  quartos  de  hora 

Hoje 

Hontem 

Amanlia 

Antes  d'hontem 

Depois  de  dmanha 

Depois  dejantar 


OF  TIME. 

The  day 

The  night 

Noon 

Midnight 

The  morning 

An  hour 

A  quarter  of  an  hour 

Half  an  hour 

Three-quarters  of  an  hour 

To-day 

Yesterday 

To-morrow 

The  day  before  yesterday 

After  to-morrow 

After  dinner 


VOCABULARY. 


287 


Depots  da  cea 

Uma  semana 

Um  mez 

Um  anno 

Um  did  santo 

Um  did  de  trabalJw 

0  nascer  do  sol 

0  POT  do  sol 

0  tempo  da  se'ga  or  da  ceifa 

0  tempo  de  vindima 


After  supper 
A  week 
A  month 
A  year 
A  holiday 
A  working  day 
The  sun-rising 
The  sunset 
The  harvest 
The  vintage 


DAS    ESTA£OES    DO    TEMPO. 

A  primavera 
0  verdo 
0  outomno 
0  inverno 


OF   THE   SEASONS. 


The  spring 
The  summer 
The  autumn 
The  winter 


OS    DIAS    DA   SEMANA. 


Domingo 
Segunda  feira 
Tercfa  feira 
Quarta  feira 
Quinta  feira 
Sexta  feira 
Sabado 


THE    DAYS    OF    THE    WEEK. 

Sunday 

Monday 

Tuesday 

Wednesday 

Thursday 

Friday 

Saturday 


DOS  MESES. 


Janeiro 

Fevereiro 

Mar$o 

Abril 

Maio 


OF    THE    MONTHS. 

January 

February 

March 

April 

May 


288 


VOCABULARY. 


Junho 

Julho 

Agosto 

Setembro 

Outobro 

Novembro 

Dezembro 


June 
July 

August 

September 

October 

November 

December 


DIAS    SANTOS. 

Dia  de  Anno-bom 

Dia  de  Reis,  a  Epiphania 

A  Candelaria 

A  Purificacao 

O  Entrudo 

Quarto,  feir a  de  Cinzas 

A  Quaresma 

Annuncia^ao 

As  Quatro  Temporas 

A  Semana  santa 

Domingo  de  Ramos 

Quarta  feira  de  Trevas 

Quinta  feira  de  Endoenqas 

jSesta  feira  da  Paixao 

Pascoa  de  Resurreiqao 

Assumpqao  de  N.  Sa. 

As  Rogaqdes,  or  Ladainhas 

Ascensdo 

Pentecostes 

Dia  do  Corpo  de  Deus 
Dia  de  S.  Joao 
Dia  de  S.  Pedro 


HOLY-DAYS    OP   THE    YEAR. 

New  Year's  Day 

Twelfth  Day 

Candlemas  Day 

The  Purification 

The  Carnival,  or  Shrovetide 

Ash  Wednesday 

The  Lent 

Lady  Day  in  March 

The  Ember  Weeks 

The  Holy  Week 

Palm  Sunday 

Wednesday  before  Easter 

Maunday  Thursday,  the  last 
Thursday  in  Lent 

Good  Friday 

Easter  Day 

Lady  Day  in  Harvest 

Rogation  Week 

The  Ascension 

The  Pentecost,  or  Whit- 
suntide 

Corpus  Christi  Day 

Midsummer  Day 

Lammas  Day 


VOCABULARY. 


289 


Dia  de  todos  os  Santos 
Dia  dos  Finados 
Dia  de  S.  Marlinho 
Dia  de  Natal 
Vigilia,  or  vespera 


All  Saints'  Day 
All  Souls 
Martinmas 
Christmas  Day 
The  eve 


DA    1GREJA    E   DIGNIDADES 
ECCLESIASTICAS. 

A  nave 
0  zimborio 
0  pmdculo 
0  coro 
A  cape/la 
Um  estante 

A  sacristia 

0  campanario,  or  torres  dos 

sinos 
0  sino 
0  badalo 
A  pia 
Um  hysope 
Um  confessionario 
Uma  tribuna 
Um  cemiterio 

Um  carneiro 

Um  altar 

Um  frontal 

Um  pallia 

Uma  toalha  do  altar 

Um  missal 

Uma  sotana 


OF   THE   CHURCH   AND   ECCLE- 
SIASTICAL  DIGNITIES. 

The  aisle  of  the  church 
The  dome 
The  pinnacle 
The  choir 
The  chapel 

A   reading   desk  or  choris- 
ter's desk 
The  vestry 
The  belfry  or  steeple 

The  bell 

The  clapper  of  the  bell 

The  font 

A  sprinkler 

A  confession  seat 

A  tribune  or  gallery 

A  churchyard   or  bury  ing  - 

place 
A  charnel 
An  altar 
Antipendium 
A  canopy 
The  altar-cloth 
A  missal,  a  prayer-book 
A  cassock 


290 

Um  sobrepelliz 
Um  roquete 

0  papa 
Um  cardeal 
Um  patriarcha 
Um  arcebispo 
Um  bis2io 
Um  legado 
Vice-legado 
Um  nuncio 
Um  prelado 
Um  commendador 
Um  abbade 
Uma  abbadessa 
Um  prior 
Um  reitor 
Um  bene/iciado 

Um  frade 
A  corda 
Um  guardido 
Um  definidor 
Um  provincial 
Um  geral 
Um  vigario 
Um  vigario-geral 
Um  dedo 
Um  arcediago 
Um  diacono 
Um  subdiacono 
Um  conego 
Um  arcipreste 
Um  clerigo 


VOCABULARY. 


A  surplice 

A  short  surplice,  a  bishop's 

surplice 
The  pope 
A  cardinal 
A  patriarch 
An  archbishop 
A  bishop 
A  legate 
A  vice-legate 
A  nuncio 
A  prelate 
A  commander 
An  abbot 
An  abbess 
A  prior 
A  rector 
A   beneficed   clergyman   or 

incumbent 
A  friar  or  monk 
A  shaven  crown 
A  guardian 
A  definitor 
A  provincial 
A  general 
A  vicar 

A  vicar-general 
A  dean 

An  archdeacon 
A  deacon 
A  subdeacon 
A  canon 
Arch-priest 
A  clergyman 


VOCABULARY. 


291 


Urn  capellao 
Um  esmoler 
Um  cura 
Benificio  simples 
Uma  freira 
Um  pregador 
Um  sacristdo 
Um  menino  do  coro 


A  chaplain 

An  almoner 

A  curate 

Sinecure 

A  nun 

A  preacher 

A  sexton,  a  vestry-keeper 

A  choir-boy 


O    MUNDO   VISIVBL. 

A  natureza 

A  materia 

Um  dtomo 

Uma  molecula 

Um  corpo 

Um  solido 

A  solidez 

Um  fluido 

A  fluidez 

0  gaz 

A  luz 

Um  ser  humano 

0  e$pa$o,  a  immensidade 


Nature 

Matter 

An  atom 

A  particle 

A  body 

A  solid 

Solidity 

A  fluid 

Fluidity 

The  gas 

The  light 

A  human  being 

The  space  or  immensity 


DO    SERVigO    DE    HUMA 
MESA. 

A  mesa 

0  aparador 

A  toalha  da  mesa 

Uma  toalha  de  mdos 

Um  guardanapo 

Uma  faca 


OF  THE  COVERING  OF  THK 
TABLE. 

The  table 
The  sideboard 
The  table-cloth 
A  towel 
A  napkin 
A  knife 


292 


VOCABULARY. 


Um  garfo 
Uma  colher 
Um  prato 
Um  saleiro 
Uma  yalheta 

A  &™e  at  I 
table 

O  assucareiro 


Um  talker 


( 
t 


i.e.. 


A  fork 

A  spoon 

A  plate 

A  saltceller 

A  cruet 

A  plate  with  a  knife,  spoon, 

or  fork 
The  sugar-basin 


JJaixella,  or  servifo  de  prata     A  set  of  silver-plate 


Uma  cuberta 

Um  copo 

Uma  garrafa 

Uma  taqa 

Um  cesto  para  por  o  pdo 

Um  faqueiro 

Lou$a  de  barro 

Louca  de  estanJio 

JBaixella,  or  serwgo  de  porce- 

lana 

Colher  da  sopa 
Uma  colher-de-chd 
Um  trinchante 
Um  prato  covo 
Uma  travessa 
Um  pimcnteiro 
Uma  mostardeira 
Uma  saladeira 
Uma  cafeteira 
Uma  chocolateira 
Um  bule 
Uma  bandeja 
Uma  leiteira 
Uma  ta$a 
Um  pires 


A  course 

A  glass 

A  bottle 

A  cup 

A  bread-basket 

A  case  for  knives 

Earthenware 

A  pewter  service 

A  china  service 

A  table-spoon 

A  tea-spoon 

A  carving-knife  and  fork 

A  soup-dish 

A  dish 

A  pepper-box 

A  mustard-pot 

A  salad-dish 

A  coffee-pot 

A  chocolate-pot 

A  tea-pot 

A  tray 

A  milk-pot 

A  cup 

A  saucer 


VOCABULARY. 


293 


Uma  poncheira 
Um  saccarolhas 
Um  cascanozes 


A  punch-bowl 
A  corkscrew 
A  nut-cracker 


AS    COMIDA8. 


0 

A  Imogar 

0  jantar 

Jantar 

A  merenda 

A  cea 

Gear 

Consoada 


DA    COMIDA. 


Pdo 

Came 

Peixe 

Came  cozida 

Came  assada 

Um  pastel 

Sopa 

Caldo 

Molho 

Fructa 

Queijo 

Vaca 

Carneiro 

Vitella 

Cordeiro 

Gallinha 

Gallo 

Peru 


THE    MEALS. 

Breakfast 
To  breakfast 
Dinner 
To  dine 
A  luncheon 
Supper 
To  sup 

A  light  supper,  as  upon  a 
fast-day 

OF   EATING. 

Bread 

Meat 

Fish 

Boiled  meat 

Roast  meat 

A  tart 

Soup 

Broth 

Sauce 

Fruit 

Cheese 

Beef 

Mutton 

Veal 

Lamb 

Fowl 

Cock 

A  turkey 


294 


VOCABULARY. 


Almondegas 

Pdo  fresco,  or  pao  molle 

Pdo  quente 

Pao  de  todafarinlia 

Pao  branco,  or  pdo  alvo 

Arroz 

Pao  de  rala 

Pdo  de  cevada 

Pdo  de  centeio 

Pdo  de  avea 

Pao  de  milho  miudo 

Pdo  de  milho  grande,  ou  de 

maiz 

Um  biscoito 
Uma  migalha  de  pdo 
Uma  fatia  de  pdo 
Uma  cddea  de  pdo 
Massa 
Uma  torta 
JRosca 
Estofado 
Fiambre 

Came  assada  sobre  yrelhas 
Came  frita 

Picado,  or  came  picada 
Umjavali,  or  porco  montez 
Presunto 
Porco 
Cabrito 
Toucinho 
Um  lombo 
Mdos  de  carneiro 
Fressura,  orforfura 
Uma  cachola  de  porco 


Force-meat  balls 
New  bread 
A  hot  loaf 
Common  bread 
White  bread 
Rice 

Brown  bread 
Barley  bread 
Rye  bread 
Oaten  bread 
Millet  bread 
Indian  corn  bread 

A  biscuit 

A  crumb  of  bread 

A  slice  of  bread 

A  crust  of  bread 

Dough 

A  tart 

Roll 

Stewed  meat 

Ham 

Broiled  meat  from  the  grill 

Fried  meat 

Mince  meat 

A  wild  boar 

Ham 

Pork 

Kid 

Bacon 

A  loin 

Sheep's  trotters 

A  pluck 

A  pig's  head 


VOCABULARY. 


295 


Linguica,  or  lingoi$a 

Chourifo  de  sangue  de  porco 

Fricasse 

Figado 

Leite 

Nata  s 

S6ro 

Requeijao 

Coalhada 

Um  ovo 

A  gemma  do  ovo 

A  clara  do  ovo 

Um  ovo  fresco 

Um  ovo  molle 

Um  ovo  duro 

Ovos  escalfados 

Ovos  fritos 

Uma  omelette 

Uma  fritura 

Ovas  de  peixe 

Doces 

Marmelada 


A  sausage 

Black-pudding 

A  fricassee 

Liver 

Milk 

Cream 

Whey 

Cream  cheese 

Curdled  milk 

An  egg 

The  yolk  of  an  egg 

The  white  of  an  egg 

A  new-laid  egg 

A  soft  egg 

A  hard  egg 

Poached  eggs 

Fried  eggs 

An  omelette 

A  fritter 

The  roes  of  fish 

Sweetmeats 

Marmalade 


O    QUE    SE   ASSA. 


Um  capao 
Uma  franya 
Um  frango 
Pombos 
Pombo  trocaz 

Uma  gallinhola 
Uma  narseja 
Uma  perdiz 


THAT   WHICH    IS   ROASTED. 

A  capon 
A  pullet 
A  chicken 
Pigeons 

A    wood-culver   or   wood- 
pigeon 
A  woodcock 
A  snipe 
A  partridge 


296 


VOCABULARY. 


Um  tordo 
Um  faisdo 
Um  faisdosinho 
Um  leitdo 
Um  veado 
Um  coelho 
Uma  lebre 
Um  adem 
Um  ganso 
Uma  pata 
Um  pato 
Uma  calhandra 
Uma  cordomiz 


A  thrush 

A  pheasant 

A  pheasant-poult 

A  sucking-pig 

A  stag 

A  rabbit 

A  hare 

A  duck 

A  drake 

A  goose 

A  gander 

A  skylark 

A  quail 


DE    OUTR08   PASSAROS. 

Uma  dguia 

Uma  dguia  nova 

Um  abutre 

Um  abestrus 

Um  esmerilhdo 

Um  gavido 

Um  mocho 

Um  falcdo 

Um  falcdo  que  ainda  ndo  voa 

Um  gerifalte 

Um  sacre 

Uma  garqa 

Um  melharuco 

Uma  garqota 

Um  milhano,  or  milhafre 

Um  corvo 

Uma  gralha 

Um  gralho 


OF    OTHER    BIRDS. 

An  eagle 

An  eaglet 

A  vulture 

An  ostrich 

A  merlin 

A  sparrowhawk 

The  horned  owl 

A  falcon 

A  jess-hawk 

A  gerfalcon 

A  saker,  a  saker-hawk 

A  heron 

Tomtit 

A  little  heron 

A  kite 

A  crow  or  raven 

A  rook 

A  jackdaw 


VOCABULARY. 


297 


Uma  alveloa,  or  rabeta 
Um  canario 
Um  pintcicilgo 
Um  metro 
Um  tentilhdo 
Um  rouxinol 
Um  verdelhdo 
Um  papagayo 
Uma  pega 

Um  estominho,  or  zorzal 
Um  fraricelko 
Um  moc/io 
Uma  coruja 
Um  morcego 

Uma    ave     nocturna,    como 
melro,  que  mama  as  cabras 
Um  francolim 
Um  bufo 
Uma  cerceta 
Um  corvo  marinho 
Um  gaivota 
Um  f/aivao 

t'nn i  andorinha 
Um  mergulhdo 
Uma  marreca 
Um  picanqo 
Um  tarallwo 
Um  pavao 
Uma  pavoa 
Uma  ardra 
Um  pardal 
Uma  rola 
Um  alcion 


A  wagtail 

A  canary-bird 

A  goldfinch 

A  blackbird 

A  chaffinch 

A  nightingale 

A  green-bird 

A  parrot 

A  magpie 

A  starling 

A  hobby,  a  musket 

Owl 

A  screech-owl 

A  bat 

A  goat-milker 

A  good  wit,  a  moor-cock 

A  night-crow  or  raven 

A  teal 

A  cormorant 

A  moor-hen  or  gull 

A  martlet  or  marten,  a  kind 

of  swallow 
A  swallow 
A  diver 
A  wild  duck 
A  wren,  a  little  bird 
A  kind  of  ortolan 
A  peacock 
A  pea-hen 
A  macaw 
A  sparrow 
A  turtle-dove 
A  kingfisher 


298 


VOCABULARY. 


Uma  cegonJia 
Uma  cuco 
Uma  cisne 
Urn  pintarroxo 
Uma  grou 
Um  pavoncino 
Um  pelicano 
Uma  tardmbola 
Um  pisco 


A  stork 

A  cuckoo 

A  swan 

A  robin 

A  crane 

A  lapwing 

A  pelican 

A  plover 

A  bullfinch  or  red-tail 


PARA    OS    BIAS    DE   TEIXE, 
OU    DE   JEJUM. 


Peixe 

Peijce  do  mar 

]*  <'!,>•('  de  agoa  doce 

Um  savel 

Uma  anchova 

Uma  enguia 

Um  barbo 

Um  hicio 

Uma  carpa 

Uma  siba 

Uma  Lula 

Uma  cobra 

Um  goraz 

Um  congro 

Uma  dourada 

Um  linguado 
Uma  lagosta 
Um  bordalo 


FOR   FISH    DAYS,    OR 
FAST    DAYS. 

Vegetable  soup 

Fish 

Sea-fish 

Fresh-water  fish 

A  shad 

An  anchovy 

An  eel 

A  barbel 

A  pike  or  jack 

A  carp 

A  cuttle-fish 

A  calamary 

The  miller's  thumb 

A  roach 

A  conger 

A  dorado,  St.   Peter's  tish, 

or  the  gilt-head 
A  sole 
A  lobster 
A    sturgeon,     sometimes 

called  a  shad-fish 


VOCABULARY. 


299 


Um  mugem 

Um  rodovalho 

Uma  sarda 

Uma  cavalla 

Uma  sardinha 

Um  bacalkdo 

Um  arenque 

Um  voador 

Um  arenque  de  fumo 

Um  arenque  com  6vas 

Uma  pescada 

Um  cadoz 

Uma  ostra 

Uma  lamprea 

Uma  lamprea  pequena 

Um  porco  marinho 

Uma  perca 

Uma  tinea 

Uma  truta 

Um  atum 

Um  salmao 

Um  camardo 

Um  caranyuejo 

Uma  ameijoa 


A  mullet 

A  turbot 

A  sort  of  small  mackerel 

A  mackerel 

A  pilchard 

Dried  cod    . 

A  herring 

A  flying-fish 

A  red  herring 

A  hard-roed  herring 

An  ake 

A  gudgeon 

An  oyster 

A  lamprey 

A  lampern 

A  porpoise 

Perch 

A  tench 

A  trout 

A  tunny-fish 

A  salmon 

A  shrimp  or  prawn 

A  crab 

A  cockle 


PARA  TEMPERAR   0    COMER. 

Sal 

Pimenta 

Pimenta  de  Cayenna 
Azeitc 
Vinayre 
Mostarda 
Cravo  da  India 


TO   SEASON    MEAT    WITH. 

Salt 

Pepper 

Cayenne  pepper 

Oil 

Vinegar 

Mustard 

Cloves 


300  VOCABULARY. 

Camlet 

Z/oureiro 

Alcaparras 

Cogumelos 

Tubaras 

Ccbolas 

Ouregdo 

Funcho 

Cebolinhas 

Alho 

Laranjas 

Limoes 

Perrexil 

Saha 

Ortelti 

Aipo 

Alho  pdrro 

Coentro 

Atrtfrfio 


Cinnamon 

I^aurel 

Capers 

Mushrooms 

Truffles 

Onions 

Organy 

Fennel 

Young  onions 

Garlic 

Oranges 

Lemons 

Wild  parsley 

Garden  parsley 

Mint 

Celery 

Leek 

Coriander 

Saffron 


PARA    SALADA. 

Alineirdo 

A/meirdo  hortense  or  endivia 

A  (face 

Chicoria 

Af/noes 

or  mastur$os 


FOR    A    SALAD, 


Cere/olio 
Rdbdo 


Wild  succory 

Endive 

Lettuce 

Succory 

Water-cresses 

Cresses 

Chervil 

Radish  root 


PARA  SOBREMESA. 


Peras 


FOR    THE    DESSERT, 


Apples 
Pears 


VOCABULARY. 


301 


Uma  pera  begamota 

Pecegos 

Uma  camoeza 

Damasco 

Cerejas 

Cerejas  de  saco 

Ginjas 

Ginja  garrafal 


Laranja  da  China 

Uvas 

Passas  de  uva 

Uva  erpim 

Figos 

Figos  lampos 

Ameixas 

Passas  de  ameixas 

Amor  as  de  sarqa  or  de  silva 

Framoesas 

Amor  as  da  amoreira 

Marmelos 

Romas 

Lima 

Azeitonas 

Amendoas 

Nesperos 

Um  melao 

Uma  melancia 

Castanhas 

N6zes 

Avelans 

Morangos 


A  bergamot  pear 

Peaches 

A  pippin 

Apricot 

Cherries 

Hard  cherries 

Sour  cherries 

A  very  large  sort  of  cherry, 

the   fruit   of    the    dwarf 

cherry-tree 
China  orange 
Grapes 
Raisins 
Gooseberries 
Figs 
The  first  figs  that  come  in 

May 
Plums 
Prunes 
Blackberries 
Raspberries 
Mulberries 
Quinces 
Pomegranates 
Lime 
Olives 
Almonds 
Medlars 
A  melon 
A  water-melon 
Chestnuts 
Wulnuts 
Hazel-nuts 
Strawberries 


302 

Medrdnho 


Urn  tamara 
Um  pistacho 
Uma  alfarroba 
Uma  belota 
Sorva 


VOCABULARY. 


A  sort  of  fruit  that  gro 
in  Portugal,  like  a  straw- 
berry, said  to  intoxicate 

A  date 

A  pistachio-nut 

A  carob 

An  acorn 

Service 


DA   BEBIDA. 

Agoa 

Vinho 

Vinho  do  Porto 

Vinko  de  Jerez 

Cerveja 

Cerveja  branca 

Cafe 

Cafe  com  leite 

Chocolate 

Chocolate  com  leite 

Cidra 

Agua-ardente 

Limonada 

Licores 

Ponche 

Rom 

Chd 

Vinho  branco 

Vinho  tinto 


OF   DRINKING. 

Water 

Wine 

Port  wine 

Sherry  wine 

Beer 

Ale 

Coffee 

Coffee  and  milk 

Chocolate 

Chocolate  and  milk 

Cider 

Brandy 

Lemonade 

Liquors 

Punch 

Rum 

Tea 

White  wine 

Red  wine 


DAS   ARVORES   E   ARBUST08. 


Um  damasqueiro 
Uma  amendoeira 


OF    TREES   AND    SHRUBS 


An  apricot  tree 
An  almond  tree 


VOCABULARY. 


303 


Uma  cerejeira 

Um  castanhdro 

Uma  cidreira 

Uma  sorveira 

Uma  pahneira 

Uma  fiyueira 

Um  marmeleiro 

Uma  madeira 

Uma  madeira  da  ndfeya 

Uma  romeira 

Um  limoeiro 

Uma  amordra 

Uma  oliveira 

Uma  nespereira 

Uma  laranjeira 

Murta 

Uma  nogueira 

Um  zamlmjdro 

Era 

Um  percegueiro 

Uma  roseira 

Uma  ameixieira 

Uma  pereira 

Romaninho 

Um  j)inheira 

Giesta 


A  cherry  tree 

A  chestnut  tree 

A  citron  tree 

A  service  tree 

A  palm  tree 

A  fig  tree 

A  quince  tree 

An  apple  tree 

A  jubub  tree 

A  pomegranate  tree 

A  lemon  tree 

A  mulberry  tree 

An  olive  tree 

A  medlar  tree 

An  orange  tree 

Myrtle 

A  walnut  tree 

A  wild  olive  tree 

Ivy 

A  peach  tree 

A  rose-bush 

A  plum  tree 

A  pear  tree 

Rosemary 

A  pine  tree 

Broom 


DOS    REPTIS   E   ANIMAES 
AMPHIBIOS. 

Uma  minhoca 
Uma  serpente 
Uma  serpente  com  azas 
Um  aspide 


OF  REPTILES  AND  AMPHIBIOUS 
CREATURES. 


An  earth-worm 
A  serpent 
A  flying  serpent 
An  asp 


304 


VOCABULARY. 


Uma  cobra 

Uma  cobra  de  casca^l 

Uma  vibora 

Um  lagarto 

Uma  osga 

Um  oscorpido 

Um  crocodilo 

Um  jacare,  or  crocodilo  da 

America 
Um  castor 
Um  cdyado 
Uma  lontra 


A  snake 

A  rattlesnake 

A  viper 

A  lizard 

An  evet,  eft,  or  newt 

A  scorpion 

A  crocodile 

An  alligator 

A  beaver 

A  land  tortoise 

An  otter 


DOS   INSECTOS. 

Uma  aranha 
Uma  formiga 
Um  caracol 
Uma  ra 
Um  sapo 
Um  oufdo 
Uma  barata 
Um  caruncho 
Uma  lagarta 
Uma  cigarra 
Uma  borboleta 
Um  grillo 
Uma  lendea 
Uma  pulga 
Uma  mosca 
Um  carrapato 
Um  gafankoto 
Polilha,  or  traqa 
Uma  vespa 


OF  INSECTS. 


A  spider 

An  ant 

A  snail 

A  frog 

A  toad 

A  hand-worm 

A  beetle 

A  woodworm 

A  caterpillar 

A  grasshopper 

A  butterfly 

A  cricket 

A  nit 

A  flea 

A  fly 

A  tick 

A  locust 

Moth 

A  wasp 


VOCABULARY. 


305 


Uma  dbelha 

Um  zango,  or  zangdo 

Um  tavao 

Um  boi  de  Dens 

Um  mosquito 

GRAOS   DE   PARENTESOO. 

Pai,  or  pae 

Mai 

Avo 

Av6 

Bisavo 

Bisav6 

Filho 

Filha 

Um  irmdo 

Uma  irmti 

0  primogenito 

0  filho  mais  mo$o 

Um  tio 

Uma  tia 

Um  sobrinko 

Uma  sobrinha 

Um  primo 

Uma  prima 

Um  primo-co-irmdo 

Uma  prima-co-irmd 

Um  cunhado 

Uma  cunhada 

Irmdo  de  pai 

Um  sogro 

Uma  sogra 

Um  padastro 


A  bee 
A  drone 
An  ox-fly 
A  ladybird 
A  gnat 

DEGREES   OP   KINDRED. 

Father 

Mother 

Grandfather 

Grandmother 

Great-grandfather 

Great-grandmother 

Son 

Daughter 

A  brother 

A  sister 

The  eldest  son 

The  youngest  son 

An  uncle 

An  aunt 

A  nephew 

A  niece 

A  cousin 

A  female  cousin 

A  male  first  cousin 

A  female  first  cousin 

A  brother-in-law 

A  sister-in-law 

A  brother  by  his  father 

A  father-in-law 

A  mother-in-law 

A  step-father 


306 


VOCABULARY. 


Uma  madrasta 
Um  enteado 
Uma  enteada 
Um  genro 
Uma  nora 
Uma  neta 
Um  neto 
Um  Hsneto 
Uma  bisneta 

Consorte,  masc.  and  fern. 
Um  marido 
Uma  mulher 
Um  irmdo  gemeo 
Um  collaco,  or  irmao  de  leite 
Umfilho  bastardo 
Um  compadre 
Uma  comadre 
Um  afilhado 
Uma  afilhada 
Um  padrinho 
Uma  madrinha 
Um  parente 
Uma  parente 

Parente  por    affinidade,    or 
consanyuinidade 


A  step-mother 
A  step-son 
A  step-daughter 
A  son-in-law 
A  daughter-in-law 
A  grand-daughter 
A  grandson 
A  great-grandson 
A  great-grand-daughter 
A  consort 
A  husband 
A  wife 

A  twin  brother 
A  foster  brother 
A  bastard 
A  male  gossip 
A  female  gossip 
A  godson 
A  god-daughter 
A  godfather 
A  godmother 
A  male  relation 
A  female  relation 
A  kin,  a  relation  either  of 
affinity  or  consanguinity 


DOS  DIFFERENTES  GENEROS  DE 
ESTADO  DO  HOMEM  E  DA 
MULHER,  E  DAS  SUAS  QUALI- 
DADES. 

Um  homem 

Uma  mulher 

Um  homem  de  idade 


OF  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  MEN 
AND  WOMEN,  AS  WELL  AS 
OF  THEIR  QUALITIES. 

A  man 
A  woman 
An  aged  man 


VOCABULARY. 


307 


Uma  mulher  de  idade 

Um  velho 

Uma  velha 

Um  mo$o,  or  mancebo 

Uma  rapariga 

Um  amante 

Uma  amiya 

Uma  crian^a,  or  menino 

Um  rapaz 

Um  rapazinho 

Uma  menina 

Uma  donzella 

Uma  virgem 

Um  amo 

Uma  ama 

Um  criado 

Criada 

Um  cidaddo 

Um  rustico 

Uma  rustica 

Um  estrangeiro 

Um  viuvo 

Uma  viuva 

Um  herdeiro 

Uma  herdeira 

Um  solteiro 

Uma  solteira 

Estado  de  solteiro 

Um  homem  casado 

Uma  mulher  casada 

Destro 

Agudo 

Recatado 

Astuto 


An  aged  woman 

An  old  man 

An  old  woman 

A  young  man 

A  girl 

A  lover 

A  lady  friend  or  mistress 

A  child,  a  little  child 

A  boy 

A  little  boy 

A  little  girl 

A  maiden 

A  virgin 

A  master 

A  mistress 

A  male  servant 

A  female  servant 

A  citizen 

A  countryman 

A  peasant  woman 

A  stranger  or  foreigner 

A  widower 

A  widow 

An  heir 

An  heiress 

A  bachelor 

A  single  woman 

Bachelorship 

A  married  man 

A  married  woman 

Dexterous 

Sharp 

Cautious 

Cunning,  sly 


308 


VOCABULARY. 


Esperto 

Doido 

Malicioso 

Timido 

Valeroso 

Estupido 

Enganoso 

Docil 

Bern  criado 

Cortez 

Justo 

Desatento 

Impertinente 

Importuno 

Descuidado 

Temerario 

Constante 

Devoto 

Deligente 

Compassivo 

Paciente 

Ambicioso 

Cobi$oso 

Soberbo 

Cobarde 

Lisonjeiro 

Goloso 

Desleal 

Desagradecido 

Inhumano 

Insolente 

Obstinado 

Teimoso 

Preguiqoso 


Sprightly 

Mad 

Malicious 

Timid 

Brave 

Stupid 

Deceitful 

Docile 

Well-bred 

Courteous 

Just 

Uncourteous 

Impertinent 

Troublesome 

Careless 

Hash 

Constant 

Devout 

Diligent 

Merciful 

Patient 

Ambitious 

Covetous 

Proud 

Coward 

Flatterer 

Dainty 

Treacherous 

Ungrateful 

Inhuman 

Insolent 

Obstinate 

Stubborn 

Slothful 


VOCABULARY. 


309 


Pr6digo 

Atrevido 

Alegre 

Zeloso 

Modesto 

Obediente 

Um  murmurador 

Officioso 

Um  feiticeiro 

Um  traidor 

Malvado 

Um  rebelde 

Perfido 

Um  bobo 

Um  mentiroso 

Altivo 

Coxo 

Manco 

Cego 

Surdo 

Paciftco 

Mudo 


Prodigal 

Bold 

Merry 

Zealous 

Modest 

Obedient 

A  censurer 

Officious 

A  sorcerer 

A  traitor 

Wicked 

A  rebel 

Perfidious 

A  buffoon 

A  liar 

Haughty 

Lame  of  the  legs 

Lame  of  the  hands 

Blind 

Deaf 

Pacific 

Dumb 


DOS  MORADORES  DE  UMA 
CIDADE. 

Um  fidalgo 

Um  nobre 

Um  mecanico 

Um  tendtiro 

Um  negodante  or  homem  de 

negocio 
0  vulgo  or  a 
A  canalha 


OF  THE  INHABITANTS  OF  A 
CITY. 

A  gentleman 

A  nobleman 

A  mechanic 

A  grocer 

A  merchant  or  tradesman 

The  mob 
The  rabble 


310 


VOCABULARY. 


Um  jornaleiro 

Um  ourives  da  prata 

Um  ourives  do  ouro 

Um  livreiro 

Um  impressor 

Um  barbeiro 

Um  mercador  de  seda 

Um  mercador  de  panno 

Um  mercador  de  panno  de 

linho,  orfanqueiro 
Um  alfayate 
Um  alfayate  remenddo 
Uma  costureira 
Um  chapeleiro  or  sombreire'iro 
Um  sapateiro 
Um  remenddo  (sapateiro) 
Um  ferreiro 
Um  alveitar 
Um  cerralheiro 
Um  parteira 
Um  medico 
Um  charlatao 
Um  cirurgiao 
Um  deutista 
Um  selleiro 
Um  carpinteiro 
Um  pddeiro 
Um  carniceiro 
Um  fruteiro 
Uma  verduleira 
Um  pasteleiro 
Um  taverneiro 
Um  cervejeiro 
Um  estalajadeiro 


A  labourer 
A  silversmith 
A  goldsmith 
A  bookseller 
A  printer 
A  barber 
A  silk-merchant 
A  woollen-draper 
A  linen-draper 

A  tailor 
A  botcher 
A  sempstress 
A  hatter 
A  shoemaker 
A  cobbler 
A  blacksmith 
A  farrier 
A  locksmith 
A  midwife 
A  physician 
A  quack 
A  surgeon 
A  dentist 
A  saddler 
A  carpenter 
A  baker 
A  butcher 
A  fruiterer 
A  herb-woman 
A  pastrycook 
A  vintner 
A  brewer 
An  innkeeper 


VOCABULARY. 


311 


Um  bufarinheiro 
Um  relojoeiro 
Um  pregoeiro 
Um  joialheiro 
Um  boticario 
Um  vidraceiro 
Um  carvoeiro 
Um  jardineiro 
Um  letrado 
Um  procurator 
Um  advogado 
Um  juiz 
Um  carcereiro 
0  carrasco 
Um  porteiro 

OS  CINCO  SENTIDOS. 

A  vista 
0  ouvido 
0  olfacto 
0  gosto 
0  tacto 


A  pedler 

A  watchmaker 

A  crier 

A  jeweller 

A  chemist 

A  glazier 

A  coalman 

A  gardener 

A  lawyer 

An  attorney 

A  solicitor,  or  a  pleader 

A  judge 

A  jailer 

The  hangman 

A  porter 

THE  FIVE  SENSES. 

The  sight 
The  hearing 
The  smell 
The  taste 
The  feeling 


AS  PARIES  DO  CORPO 
HUMANO. 

A  cabe$a 
Os  mi6los 
0  toutifo 
A  testa 
A  molleira 
Asfontes 
A  orelha 
0  cartilagem 


THE  PARTS  OF  THE  HUMAN 
BODY. 

The  head 

The  brains 

The  hinder  part  of  the  head 

The  forehead 

The  mould  of  the  head 

The  temples 

The  ear 

The  gristle  or  cartilage 


312 


VOCABULARY. 


0  timpano 

A  sobrancelha 

As  palpebras  or  capellas  dos 

olhos 

As  pestanas 
0  lagrimal 
0  alvo  do  olko 
As  meninas  dos  olhos 
0  nariz 
As  vcntas 
0  septo  or  diaphragma  do 

nariz 

A  ponta  do  nariz 
A  boca 
Os  denies 
A  gengiva 
A  lingoa 
Paladar  or  ceo  da  boca 

A  qiieixada 
A  barba 
As  bar  has 
Os  bigodes 
0  pesco$o 
A  nuca 
A  garganta 
0  seio 
0  peito 
0  estomago 
As  costelas 
A  verilka 
0  bra$o 
0  cotovelo 
0  sobdco 


The  drum  of  the  ear 
The  eyebrow 
The  eyelid 

The  eyelashes 

The  corner  of  the  eye 

The  white  of  the  eye 

The  eyeballs 

The  nose 

The  nostrils 

The  gristle  of  the  nose 

The  tip  of  the  nose 

The  mouth 

The  teeth 

The  gum 

The  tongue 

The  roof  or  palate  of  the 

mouth 
The  jaw 
The  chin 
The  beard 
The  mustachios 
The  neck 

The  nape  of  the  neck 
The  throat 
The  bosom 
The  breast 
The  stomach 
The  ribs 
The  groin 
The  arm 
The  elbow 
The  arm-pit 


VOCABULARY. 


313 


A  mdo 

0  pulso 

A  /xilma  da  mao 

Ox  dedos 

0  dcdo  polegar 

0  dedo  mostrador 

0  dedo  do  meio 

0  dedo  annular 

0  dedo  meninko  or  minimo 

Ax  pontas  dos  dedos 

As  juntas  e  nos  dos  dedos 

Um  dedo  do  pe 

A  unha 

As  costas 

Os  hombros 

As  ilhargas 

A  cdxa 

0  joelho 

A  barriga  da  perna 

0  espinha$o 

0  tomozelo 

Ope' 

A  planta  do  pe 

0  cora$ao 

On  bofes  or  pulmoes 

0  Jigado 

0  ba$o 

Os  rins 

Of  el 

0  sangue 

A  suor 

Uma  lagrima 


The  hand 

The  wrist 

The  palm  of  the  hand 

The  fingers 

The  thumb 

The  forefinger 

The  middle  finger 

The  ring  finger 

The  little  finger 

The  tips  or  tops  of  the 

fingers 
The  joints  and  knuckles  of 

the  fingers 
A  toe 
The  nail 
The  back 
The  shoulders 
The  sides 
The  thigh 
The  knee 

The  calf  of  the  leg 
The  spine 
The  ankle 
The  foot 

The  sole  of  the  foot 
The  heart 
The  lungs 
The  liver 
The  spleen 
The  kidneys 
The  gall 
The  blood 
Perspiration 
A  tear 


314 


VOCABULARY. 


VESTIDOS  DO  HOMEM. 

Umfato 

Uma  casaca 

Uma  gravata 

Uma  cliaplo 

Uma  camisa 

Um  colete 

Um  colarlnho 

Os  punhos 

As  ceroulas 

Um  ckambre 

As  cafyas 

0  len$o  do  pescoco 

0  len$o  d'assuar 

Uma  casaca 

Um  trage  de  ca$a 

Os  botoes 

Um  sobretudo 

Uma  capa  or  capote 

Um  barrete  or  gorra 

0  chapeo 

O  chapeo  de  chuva 

As  botas 

Os  sapatos 

As  meias 

As  piuga* 

Peitinkos 

As  solas  dos  sapatos 

0  tacao  das  botas 

Os  suspensorios 

Um  descafyador 

A  bengala 

Uma  navalha  de  barba 


A  MAN'S  CLOTHES. 

A  suit  of  clothes 

A  coat 

A  cravat  or  necktie 

A  hat 

A  shirt 

A  waistcoat 

A  collar 

The  wristbands 

The  drawers 

A  morning  gown 

The  trousers 

The  necktie 

The  handkerchief 

A  coat 

A  hunting  dress 

The  buttons 

An  overcoat 

A  cloak 

A  cap 

The  hat 

The  umbrella 

The  boots 

The  shoes 

The  stockings 

The  socks 

Shirt  fronts 

The  soles  of  the  shoes 

The  heels  of  the  boots 

The  braces 

A  boot-jack 

The  walking-stick 

A  razor 


VOCABULARY. 


315 


As  ligas 
As  chinellas 


VESTIUOS  DA  MULIIER. 

Uma  andgoa 

Uma  saia 

0  atacador 

Um  vestido 

Um  lencinho  de  pesco^o 

Um  mantelete 

Um  cinto 

Um  chape'o 

Um  collar 

Um  aderfyo  de  brilhantes 

Um  clialle 

Um  manto 

Um  avental 

Os  braceletes 

Um  annel 

Os  brincos 

Um  leque 

Um  penteador 

Um  toucador 

As  sindes 

Um  espelho 

Um  regdlo  or  manguito 

0  espartilho 

Um  pente 

Alfinetes 

Uma  tesoura 

Um  dedal 

Uma  agulha 

A  linha 


The  garters 
The  slippers 

WOMEN'S  CLOTHES. 

A  petticoat 

An  under-petticoat 

The  lace 

A  gown 

A  neckerchief 

A  mantelet 

A  sash 

A  bonnet 

A  necklace 

A  set  of  diamonds 

A  shawl 

A  mantle 

An  apron 

The  bracelets 

A  ring 

The  earrings 

A  fan 

A  combing-cloth 

A  toilet  or  dressing-table 

Patches  to  wear  on  the  face 

A  looking-glass 

A  muff 

The  stays 

A  comb 

Pins 

A  pair  of  scissors 

A  thimble 

A  needle 

The  thread 


31G 


VOCABULARY. 


Urn  fio  de  perolas 

Polvilhos 

Joias 

Cor 

Um  palito 

0  fuso 

Uma  almofadinho  para 

alfinetes 
Uma  agulheta 
Fitas 

0  VGO 

Eenda 
Bilros 
Agoa  de  cheiro 


A  row  of  pearls 

Powder 

Jewels 

Colour 

A  toothpick 

The  spindle 

A  small  pin-cushion 

A  bodkin 
Ribbons 
The  veil 
Lace 
Bobbins 
Scented  water 


OS  DOZE  SIGNOS  CELESTES.       THE  TWELVE  CELESTIAL 


Aries 

Touro 

Gemini  or  geminis 

Cancer 

Lcfio 

Virgem 

Libra 

Escorpido 

tiagitario 

Capricornio 

A<fuario 

Peixes 


Aries  or  the  ram 
The  bull 
The  twins 
The  crab 
The  lion 
The  virgin 
The  balance 
The  scorpion 
The  archer 
The  goat 
The  wrater-bearer 
The  fishes 


DE  UMA  CASA  E  DO  QUE  LHE 
PERTENCE. 

Uma  casa 
0  alicerse 


OF  A  HOUSE  AND  ALL  TIIAT 
BELONGS  TO  IT. 

A  house 

The  foundation 


VOCABULARY. 


3J7 


Uma  parede 

Um  tabique 

Um  pdteo 

Um  andar 

A  fachada 

Uma  janella 

Uma  abobada 

As  escadas 

Os  degrdos 

Um  tdhado 

As  telhas 

Os  ladrilhos  or  tijolos 

Uma  sala 

Uma  antecamara  or  saleta 

Um  saldo 

Um  tecto 

Uma  alcova 

Uma  baranda 

Um  gabinete 

Um  quarto 

Um  guarda-roupa 

Uma  adega 

Uma  cozinha 

Uma  dispcnsa 

Uma  chamine 

A  cavallariqa 

Um  gallinheiro  or  casa  das 

gallinhas 
Um  poleiro 
Um  jar  dim 
Uma  casa  dejantar 
Um  quarto  de  cama 
A  porta 
Um  postigo 


A  wall 

A  light  brick  wall 

A  court  or  yard 

A  floor 

The  front 

A  window 

A  vault 

The  stairs 

The  steps 

A  tiled  roof 

The  tiles 

The  bricks 

A  sitting  or  drawing-room 

An  antechamber 

A  hall 

A  roof 

A  small  room 

A  balcony 

A  closet 

A  room 

A  wardrobe 

A  wine-cellar 

A  kitchen 

A  pantry 

A  chimney 

The  stable 

A  hen-house 

A  hen-roost 
A  garden 
A  dining-room 
A  bed-room 
The  door 
A  wicket 


318 


VOCABULARY. 


0  liminar  or  luminar 

Uma  clara  boia 

0  algeroz 

As  beirciB  or  abas  do  telhado 

A  couceira  da  porta 

Uma  fec/tadura 

Um  cadeado 

0  ferrolho 

A  tranca  da  porta 

0  cano  da  cJiave 

Uma  cJiave  mestra 

As  yuardas  dafecJiadura 

0  pallietao  da  cJiave 

A  vidraqa 

Uma  escad,afeita  a  caracol 

Escada  secreta 

Uma  viga 

A  parede  mestra 

As  paredes  meianciras 


The  threshold 

A  skylight 

The  gutter-tile 

The  eaves 

The  hinges 

A  lock 

A  padlock 

The  bolt 

The  bar  of  the  door 

The  pipe  of  a  key 

A  master-key 

The  wards  of  a  lock 

The  key  bit 

The  glass  of  a  window 

A  winding  staircase 

Private  staircase 

A  beam 

The  main  wall 

The  party  walls 


MOVEIS  DJUM  QUARTO  DE  CAMA.        A  BED-ROOM  FURNITURE,- 


A  cama  or  leito 

0  sobreceo  da  cama 

As  cortinas  da  cama 

Os  ltnc(6es 

A  cabeceira  da  cama     » 

0  pe  da  cama 

Uma  colcha 

Um  colchao 

Um  cobertor 

Um  cobertor  defelpa 

Uma  cama  de  armacdo 

Um  travesseiro 


The  bed 

The  bed  tester 

The  bed  curtains 

The  sheets 

The  head  of  the  bed 

The  foot  of  the  bed 

A  counterpane,  a  quilt 

A  mattress 

A  blanket 

A  rug 

A  bedstead  with  tester 

A  bolster 


VOCABULARY. 


319 


Um  tapcte 

Tapec(aria 

Um  bahn 

Um  relogio 

Uma  estufa 

Uma  chave 

Um  espregui^ador 

Um  enxergao 

Uma  esteira 

Os  folles 

As  tenazes 

Uma  pd 

Um  armario 

A  vassoura 

Um  banco 

Uma  bacia  or  alguidar 

Uma  quentador 

Uma  caixa 

Uma  palmatoria 

Um  bufete 

Uma  gaiola 

Um  canape  or  sofa 

Uma  cadeira 

Um  casti$al 

Um  braseirinho 

A  chamine 

Osferros  da  chamine 

Uma  commoda 

Um  espelho 

Umjarro 

Uma  bacia  de  maos 

Um  parafogo 

Um  apagador 

Caixa  do  chapeo 


A  carpet 

Tapestry 

A  trunk 

A  clock  or  watch 

A  hothouse 

A  key 

A  couch 

A  paillasse 

A  mat 

The  bellows 

The  tongs 

A  shovel 

A  cupboard 

The  broom 

A  bench 

A  basin 

A  warming-pan 

A  box 

A  flat  candlestick 

A  sideboard 

A  cage 

A  sofa 

A  chair 

A  tall  candlestick 

A  small  fire-pan 

The  chimney 

The  fire-irons 

A  chest  of  drawers 

A  looking-glass 

An  ewer 

A  hand-basin 

A  fire-screen 

An  extinguisher 

Hat-box 


320 


VOCABULARY. 


Cadeira  de  bra$os 

Um  candieiro 

Um  colchdo 

Um  lavatorio 

Uma  almofada 

Umafronha  de  almofada 

Um  balde 

Uma  papeleira 

Um  quadro 

Uma  mesa 

Uma  gaveta 

Um  toucador 

Uma  lamparina 

Uma  maleta 


Arm-chair 

A  lamp 

A  mattress 

A  wash-hand  stand 

A  pillow 

A  pillow-case 

A  pail 

A  writing-desk 

A  picture 

A  table 

A  drawer 

A  toilet  table 

A  night  lamp 

A  portmanteau 


UTENSILIOS  DE  COZINHA. 

Uma  panella 

0  testo 

Um  ferro  para  atifar  o  lume 

Uma  escumadeira 

Uma  colher  grandc 

Uma  caldeira 

Uma  sertd  OY  frigideira 

Um  coador 

As  grelhas 

Um  ralo 

Um  espeto 

Um  almofariz 

Uma  mdo  do  almofariz 
Uma  redoma 
Um  balde 
0  sabdo 


KITCHEN  UTENSILS. 

A  saucepan 

The  lid  of  a  saucepan 

A  poker 

A  skimmer 

A  ladle 

A  kettle 

A  frying-pan 

A  cullender  or  strainer 

The  gridiron 

A  grater 

A  spit 

A    mortar   wherein    things 

are  pounded 
A  pestle 
A  glass  shade 
A  bucket  or  pail 
The  soap 


VOCABULARY. 


321 


'0  forno 
A  pa  do  forno 

Um  vasculho  para  alimpar  o 
forno 


The  oven 

The  peal  of  the  oven 

A   coal-rake  to  make  clear 


an  oven 


CORES. 

Branco 
Azul 

Azul  celeste 
Azul  ferrete 
Azul  claro 
Cor  de  camurqa 
Amarello 
Cor  de  rosa 
Cor  de  palha 
Verde 
>Cor  de  verde  mar  or  verde 

claro 

Cor  vermelha  or  incarnada 
Cor  vermelha  muito  viva  or 

carmim 
•Cor  de  carne 
Cor  carmesim 
Cor  negro,  or  preta 
Cor  de  met 
Furta-cores 
Cor  viva 
Cor  triste 
Cor  escura 
Cor  carregada 
Cor  de  fogo 
Pardo 
Cor  de  cinza 


COLOURS. 

White 

Blue 

Sky-colour 

Dark  blue 

Light  blue 

Light  yellow 

Yellow 

Rose  colour 

Straw  or  cream  colour 

Green 

Sea-green 

Red  colour 

Carmine,     a      bright     red 

colour 

Flesh  colour 
Crimson  red 
Black  colour 
A  dark  yellow 
A   deep   changeable  colour 
A  lively  and  gay  colour 
A  dull  colour 
A  dark  colour 
A  deep  colour 
Fire  colour 
Grey 
Ash  colour 

Y 


322 

Escarlate 

Leonado 

Cor  de  laranja 

Cor  de  azeitona 

Roxo 

Roxo  or  cor  de  aurora 


VOCABULARY. 


Scarlet 
Tawny 

Orange  colour 
Olive  colour 
Purple,  violet 
Aurora  colour 


CRIADOS   DOMESTICOS. 

Um  capelldo 

Um  secretario 

Um  tutor 

Uma  governante 

Um  preceptor 

Um  mordomo 

Um  dispenseiro 

Uma  criada 

Um  cocheiro 

Um  lacaio 

Um  palafreneiro 

Um  criado 

Um  cozinheiro 

Uma  cozinheira 

Um  porteiro 

Um  jardineiro 

Um  hortelao 

Um  creado  de  quarto 

Um  pagem 

Uma  ama 

DAS  POVOCOES. 

Uma  capital 
Uma  cidade 


SERVANTS. 

A  chaplain 

A  secretary 

A  tutor 

A  governess 

A  preceptor 

A  steward 

A  butler 

A  maid-servant 

A  coachman 

A  footman 

A  groom 

A  man-servant 

A  man  cook 

A  woman  cook 

A  door-keeper 

A  flower  gardener 

A  kitchen  gardener 

A  valet  de  chambre 

A  page 

A  nurse 


OF   TOWNS,    BUILDINGS,  ETC 


A  capital 
A  city 


VOCABULARY. 


323 


Uma  metropole 

Uma  villa 

Um  lugar 

Um  casal 

Uma  parroquia 

Um  bairro 

Um  palacio 

Um  castello 

Uma  casa 

Uma  quinta 

Uma  casinJia 

Uma  cJioc(a  or  cabana 

Um  cemiterio 

Os  arrabaldes 

Um  chafariz 

Uma  Canada 

Uma  praqa 

Uma  ponte 

Um  parapeito 

Um  arco 

Um  passeio 

Uma  rua 

Um  jardim 


A  metropolis 

A  village 

A  place 

A  farmhouse 

A  parish 

A  quarter  of  the  town 

A  palace 

A  castle 

A  house 

A  country  house 

A  little  house 

A  hut 

A  churchyard  or^cemetery 

The  suburbs 

A  public  fountain 

A  pavement 

A  square 

A  bridge 

A  parapet 

An  arch 

A  promenade 

A  street 

A  garden 


A   TERRA. 

0  globo  terraqueo 
0  hemispherio 
0  equador 
Os  tropicos 
0  p6lo 
Polar 
0  norte 
Septentrional 


THE    EARTH. 

The  terrestrial  globe 

The  hemisphere 

The  equator 

The  tropics 

The  pole 

Polar 

The  north 

Northern 


324  VOCABULARY. 

0  este  or  oriente 

Oriental 

0  sul  or  meiodia 

Meridional 

0  oeste  or  occidente 

Occidental 

Um  meridiano 

A  latitude 

A  longitude 

Um  grdo 

Um  continente 

Continental 

Uma  planicie 

Um  valle 

Uma  veiga 

Uma  ckarneca,  or  ermo 

Um  cerro 

Um  oiteiro 

Uma  montanha 

O  cume 

0  declive 

A  falda  de  uma  montanha 

Uma  cordilheira 

Uma  planicie 

Um  desfiladeiro 

Um  volcdo 

A  cratera 

Um  abysmo,  precipicio 

Um  cabo  or  promontorio 

Um  isthmo 

Uma  peninsula 

Um  ilka 

A  costa 


The  east 

Eastern 

The  south 

Southern 

The  west 

Western 

A  meridian 

The  latitude 

The  longitude 

A  degree 

A  continent 

Continental 

A  plain  or  flat  country 

A  valley 

A  plain  pasture  ground  by 

a  river  side 
A  barren  sandy  land 
A  hillock 
A  hill 

A  mountain 
The  summit 
The  declivity 
The  skirt  of  a  mountain 
A  range  of  mountains 
A  plain 

A  mountain  pass 
A  volcano 
A  crater 
An  abyss 
A  cape 
An  isthmus 
A  peninsula 
An  island 
The  coast 


VOCABULARY. 


325 


A  praia 

Uma  rocka 

Um  rockedo 

Um  escolho  or  recife 

Um  banco  d'areia 

Um  deserto 


The  beach 

A  rock 

A  cluster  of  rocks 

A  rock  under  water 

A  sand-bank 

A  desert 


SUBSTANCIAS   MINERAES. 

Um  mineral 

Pedras  preciosas 

Uma  mina 

Uma  camada 

0  ae(o 

0  iman 

A  dgata 

Magn&ico 

0  bronze 

0  alabastro 

Uma  amathista 

0  antimonio 

A  pi^arra 

A  prata 

A  argilla  or  greda 

0  arsenico 

0  betume 

0  carvao  de  pedra 

A  cat 

Terra  calcarea 

0  azinhabre 

0  cabalto 

0  coral 

Uma  cornelina 

A  caparrosa 


MINERAL   SUBSTANCES. 

A  mineral 

Precious  stones 

A  mine 

A  stratum 

Steel 

The  loadstone 

The  agate 

Magnetic 

Bronze 

Alabaster 

The  amethyst 

Antimony 

Slate 

Silver 

Clay 

Arsenic 

Bitumen 

Mineral  coals 

Lime 

Calcareous  earth 

Verdigris 

Cobalt 

Coral 

The  cornelian  stone 

Copperas 


326 


VOCABULARY. 


0  cobre 

Um  diamante 

A  esmeralda 

O  estanho 

0  ferro 

0  granito 

0  jaspe 

0  latao 

A  maganesia 

0  marmore 

0  mercuric  or  azougue 

O  chumbo 

0  nitro 

A  opdla 

0  ouro 

0  rubim 

0  enxofre 

0  topazio 

0  zinco 


Copper 

A  diamond 

The  emerald 

Pewter 

Iron 

Granite 

Jasper 

Brass 

Magnesia 

Marble 

Mercury  or  quicksilver 

Lead 

Nitre 

Opal 

Gold 

Ruby 

Brimstone 

A  topaz 

Zinc 


COLHEITAS   DOS   CAMPOS. 

Cereaes 

Aveia 

Beterraba 

Trigo 

Milho 

Canhamo 

Favas 

Feno 

Herva 

Lentilhas 

Linko 

Nabos 


PRODUCTION    OF   THE   FIELDS. 

Cereals 

Oats 

Beet-root 

Wheat 

Millet 

Hemp 

Broad  beans 

Hay 

Herbs  or  grass 

Lentils 

Hemp 

Turnips 


VOCABULARY. 


327 


JErvilhas 

Batatas 

Arroz 

Piperigallo 

Centeio 

Cha 

Trevo 

Tabaco 

Oliveira 

Vide 


Peas 

Potatoes 

Rice 

Sainfoin 

Rye 

Tea 

Trefoil 

Tobacco 

Olive  tree 

Vine  branch 


DA   AGRICULTURA. 

•Um  agricultor 

•Urn  quinteiro 

Um  boieiro 

Um  vaqueiro 

Um  porqueiro 

Um  pastor 

Um  cavador 

Um  vinhateiro 

Um  lavrador 

Um  semeador 

Um  roqador 

Um  segador 

Hortaliqa 

Pastes 

Um  arado 

0  ferro  do  arado 

A  rabi$a  do  arado 

Uma  aguilhada 

Um  ensinho 

Uma  fouce 

Uma  fouce  ro$adoura 


OF   AGRICULTURE. 

A  husbandman 

A  farmer 

A  herdsman 

A  cowkeeper 

A  swineherd 

A  shepherd 

A  digger 

A  vine  dresser 

A  farmer 

A  sower 

A  weeder 

A  reaper 

All  sorts  of  herbage 

Pasture  ground 

A  plough 

The  ploughshare 

The  plough  handle 

A  goad 

A  rake 

A  scythe  or  sickle 

A  weeding  hook 


328 

Urn  podao 

Urn,  mangoal 

Um  forcado 

Um  rego 

Um  basque 

Uma  espiga 

A  cabeca  da  espiga 


VOCABULARY. 


carreta 
Um  carro 
Uma  roda 
0  eixo 

0  raio  da  roda 
Um  curral  de  bois 
Um  curral  de  ovel/ias 
Um  chiqueiro  de  porcos 
Um  tarro 
Uma  francela 
Uma  enxada 
Um  enxadao 
Uma  canga 
Uma  sebe 
Uma  ramada 
Um  rebeirinho 
0  tempo  de  tosquia 
Cantiga  dos  segadores 


A  pruning  knife 

A  flail 

A  pitchfork 

A  furrow 

A  wood 

An  ear  of  corn 

The   grain    at    the   top    of 

the  ear  of  com 
A  waggon 
A  cart 
A  wheel 

The  axletree  of  a  wheel 
The  spoke  of  a  wheel 
An  ox  stall 
A  sheepfold 
A  hog's  sty 
A  milk-pail 
A  cheese-vat 
A  hoe  or  spade 
A  mattock 
A  yoke  for  oxen 
A  hedge  or  fence 
A  bower 
A  rivulet 

The  time  of  shearing  sheep 
Harvest  home 


ANIMAES  DOMESTICOS. 

Um  burro  or  jumento 
Um  carneiro 
Uma  ovelha 
Um  cordeiro 
Um  bode 


DOMESTIC   ANIMALS. 

A  donkey 
A  sheep 
An  ewe 
A  lamb 
A  buck-goat 


VOCABULARY. 


329> 


Uma  cobra 

Urn  cabrito 

Um  gato 

Um  gatinho 

Um  cao 

Um  cdozinho 

Um  fraldiqueiro 

Um  lebrel 

Um  cavallo 

Uma  egua 

Um  poldro 

Um  cavallo  inteiro 

de  montar 
de  carroqa 
d'aluguer 
de  posta 
de  sella 
alazdo 
baio 


A  goat 

A  kid 

A  cat 

A  kitten 

A  dog 

A  puppy 

A  lapdog 

A  greyhound 

A  horse 

A  mare 

A  colt 

A  stallion 

A  riding  horse 

A  van-horse 

A  hackney  horse 

A  post-horse 

A  saddle-horse 

A  sorrell  horse 

A  bay  horse 


COUSAS   PERTENCENTES    A 
GUERRA. 

Servico  or  vida  militar 

Militar  or  servir  na  guerra 

Artilheria 

Um  canhdo  or  peqa  de  arti- 

Iheria 

Um  canhdo  de  ferro 
Um  canhao  de  bronze 
A  alma  do  canhdo 
0  fogao  do  canhao 

A  culatra  do  canhao 


THINGS   RELATING    TO    WAR.- 

Warfare 

To  serve  in  the  army 

Artillery 

A  cannon 

Iron  cannon 

Brass  cannon 

The  mouth  of  the  cannon 

The    touch-hole    of    the 

cannon 
The  breach  of  the  cannon* 


VOCABULARY. 


0    botdo  or  extremidade  da 

culatra 

Balas  encadeadas 
Uma  bala  de  canhdo 

A  carreta  de  canhao 

Polvora 

Um  canhdo  de  vinte  e  quatro 

Calibre 

Carregar 

Escorvar 

Fazer  pontaria 

Petrechos    or    munic(oes    de 

guerra 

Encravar  uma  peca 
Descavalgar  uma  peca 
Disparar 
Um  tiro  de  pe$a 
O  trem  de  artilheria 
Uma  colubrina 
Um  falconete 
Um  petardo 
Um  pedreiro 
Uma  bomba 
Uma  bombarda 
Um  morteiro 
Uma  granada 
Uma  espingarda 
Uma  pistola 
Uma  carabina 
Um  mosqucte 
Uma  machadinha 
Uma  lanqa 
Uma  aldbarda 


The  pommel 

Chain  shots 

A  cannon-ball  or  cannon- 
shot 

The  carriage  of  a  cannon 

Gunpowder 

A  twenty-four  pounder 

Calibre 

To  load 

To  prime 

To  level 

Military  stores  or  ammuni- 
tion 

To  nail  up  a  gun 

To  dismount  a  gun 

To  fire 

A  cannon-shot 

The  train  of  artillery 

A  culverin 

A  falconet 

A  petard 

A  swivel-gun 

A  bomb 

A  great  gun 

A  mortar-piece 

A  grenade 

A  firelock 

A  pistol 

A  carbine 

A  musket 

A  battle-axe 

A  lance 

A  halberd 


VOCABULARY. 


331 


-Uma  partasana 
Um  pifjrut 
Calar  os  piques  para,  resistir 

a  cavallaria 
Um  alfonge 
Uma  espada 
Desembainliar  a  espada 
0  punho  da  espada 
A  macfi  da  espada 
A  guarniqao  da  espada 
A  folha  da  espada 
Meter  mao  d  espada 

Matar 

Ferir 

Desbaratar 

Saquear 

Um  punhal 

Uma  bayoneta 

Armar  a  bayoneta 

Um  capacete 

Um  morrido 

Uma  viseira 

0  gorjal  or  gola 

Um  peito  de  armas 

Uma  couraqa 

0  espaldar 

Um  cossolete 

Um  broquel 

Um  escudo 

Uma  adaga 

Uma  saia  de  malha 

0  rei  de  armas 


A  partizan 

A  pike 

To  present  the  pikes  against 

the  cavalry 
A  scimitar 
A  sword 

To  unsheathe  the  sword 
The  handle  of  a  sword 
The  pommel  of  a  sword 
The  hilt  of  a  sword 
The  blade  of  a  sword 
To  clap  one's  hand  on  one's 

sword 
To  kill 
To  wound 
To  rout 
To  sack 
A  dagger 
A  bayonet 
To  fix  the  bayonets 
A  helmet 
A  morion 

The  vizor  of  a  helmet 
The  gorget 
A  breastplate 
A  cuirass 
The  backplate 
A  corslet 
A  buckler 
A  shield 

Dagger,  a  short  sword 
A  coat  of  mail 
The   king-at-arms   or    king 

of  heralds 


332 


VOCABULARY. 


Um  arauto 

Um  general 

Um  tenente  general 

Um  major  general 

Um  inajor 

Um  sargento 

Um  marechal 

Um  coronet 

Um  coronet  de  infanteria 

Um  official 

Um  brigadeiro 

Um  tenente  coronet 

Um  ajudante 

TJm  ajudante  de  ordens 

Um  capitdo 

Um  jjosto  de  capitdo 

Um  tenente 

Um  corneta 

Um  alferes 

As  bandeiras 

0  estandarte 

0  porta  estandarte 

0  pagador 

Um  commissario 

Um  commissario  geral 

Um  engenheiro 

Um  quartet  mestre 

Um  cabo  de  esquadra 

Um  tambor  or  caixa 

Um    tambor,   or  o  que  toca 

tambor 
As  baquetas 
Os  cordeis  do  tambor 
Os  toques  do  tambor 


A  herald 

A  general 

A  lieutenant-general 

A  major-general 

A  major 

A  serjeant 

Marshal 

A  colonel 

A  colonel  of  infantry 

An  officer 

A  brigadier 

A  lieutenant-colonel 

An  adjutant 

An  aide-de-camp 

A  captain 

A  captaincy  or  captainship 

A  lieutenant 

A  cornet 

An  ensign 

The  colours 

The  standard 

The  standard-bearer 

The  paymaster 

A  commissary 

A  commissary-general 

An  engineer 

A  quarter-master 

A  corporal 

A  drum 

A  drummer 

The  drum-sticks 
The  drum-strings 
The  beats  of  a  drum 


VOCABULARY. 


333 


Tocar  a  tambor 

A  alvorada  or  general 

Passar  mostra 

Um  trombeteiro  or  trombeta 

Um  pifano 

Soldo 

Um  soldado 

Soldado  que  estd  de  sentinella 

Entrar  de  guarda 

Sentinella 

Render  a  guarda.)  sentinellas,  &c 

Bloquear 

Um  soldado  de  infanteria 

Um  granadeiro 

Um  dragao 

Um  soldado  de  cavallo 

Montar  a  cavallo 

Apear-se 

Um  guarda  da  pessda  real 

Um  couraceiro 

Um  fuzileiro 

Um  alabardeiro 

Um  pioneiro 

Um  mineiro  or  minador 

Um  bombardeiro 

0  tiro  da  artilheria,  or  o 
espar(o  que  a  bala  despa- 
rada  cor  re  ;  Alcance 

Um  artilheiro 

A  arte  da  artilheria 

General  de  artilheria 

Um  voluntario 

Recrutas 


To  beat  a  drum 

The  general,  one  of  the  beats 

of  the  drum 

To  muster,  to  review  forces 
A  trumpeter 
A  fifer  or  fife 

Wages,  or  pay  for  soldiers 
A  soldier 
Soldier  on  duty 
To  mount  guard 
Sentinel,  sentry 
.To  relieve  the  guard,  <fec. 
To  block  up 
A  soldier  of  infantry 
A  grenadier 
A  dragoon 

A  trooper  or  cavalry  soldier 
To  get  011  horseback 
To  alight 
A  life-guardsman 
A  cuirassier 
A  fusilier 
A  halberdier 
A  pioneer 
A  miner 
A  bombardier 
The  range  of  a  gun 


An  artilleryman 

Gunnery 

General  of  artillery 

A  volunteer 

Recruits 


334 


VOCABULARY. 


Um  explorador,  or  corrector 
de  exercito  ' 

Um  espia 

0  que  leva  viveres  ao  exer- 
cito, or  vivandeiro 

Um  soldado  quefaz  correrias 

Um  timbale  or  atabale 

Infanteria 

Cavallaria 

Cavallaria  ligeira 

A  vanguarda 

A  retaguarda 

0  corpo  de  reserva 

0  corpo  de  guarda 

0  piquete 

A  ala 

Um  batalhdo 

Um  destacamento 

Um  regimento 

Uma  companhia 

Um  esquadrdo 

Uma  mochila 

0  bagagem 

Batedores  do  campo 

0  armazem 

As  muralhas 

Uma  amea  or  ameya 

0  parapeito 

Um  castello 

Um  forte 

Uma  fortaleza 

Uma  fortifica$do 

Uma  torre 


A  scout 

A  spy 

Sutler 


A  marauder,  a  soldier  that 

goes  marauding 
A  kettledrum 
Infantry 
Cavalry 
Light  cavalry 
The  vanguard 
The  rear 

The  reserve  corps 
The  body-guard 
The  picquet  guard 
The  wing  of  an  army 
A  battalion 
A  detachment 
A  regiment 
A  company 
A  squadron 
A  knapsack 
The  baggage 
Discoverers 
The  magazines 
The  walls 
A  battlement 
The  parapet 
A  castle 
A  fort 
A  fortress 
A  fortification 
A  tower 


VOCABULARY. 


335 


Uma  cidadella 

Um  baluarte 

Uma  fileira 

Uma  cortina 

Meia  lua 

Uma  troneira 

Um  terra  plena 

Um  rebelim  or  revelim 

Uma  contrascarpa 

Uma  barreira 

Uma  falsabraga 

Um  fosso 

Uma  guarita 

Uma  casamata 

0  corredor  or  estrada  coberta 

Os  cestoes 

Uma  estacada  or  palissada 

Um  reducto 

Uma  atalaya 

Uma  mania  or  mantelete 

Faxina 
Uma  mina 
Fazer  voar  a  mina 
Uma  trincheira 
Abrir  as  trincheiras 
Um  campo 
Os  viveres 
Uma  batalha 
Dar  batalha 
Uma  escaramuca 
Um  sitio  or  cerco 
Um  quartet 
Uma  encamisada 


A  citadel 

A  bulwark 

A  file 

A  curtain       ,     , 

Half-moon 

A  loophole 

A  platform  of  earth 

A  ravelin 

A  counterscarp 

A  barrier 

A  fausse-braie 

A  ditch 

A  sentry-box 

A  casemate 

The  covered  way 

The  gabions 

A  palisade 

A  redoubt 

A  watch-tower 

A  shield,  or  cover  for  men 

from  the  shot 
Fascines 
A  mine 

To  spring  a  mine 
A  trench 

To  open  the  trenches 
A  camp 
The  provisions 
A  battle 
To  give  battle 
A  skirmish 
A  siege 
A  quarter 
A  canteen 


336 


VOCABULARY. 


JJma  sortida 

Eater 

Uma  brecha 

Um  pontao 

Uma  escalada 

Um  assalto 

Dar  assalto 

Tomar  por  assalto 

A  cJiamada 

Capitular 

Capitula^ao 

Tregoas 

Uma  guamiqao 

Um  2^reboste 

Uma  leva 

Levantar  soldados,  or  fazer 

leva  de  gente 
Levantar  o  sitio 
Levantar  o  campo 
Assentar  o  campo 
Um  campo  volante 
Uma  campanha 
Meter-se  em  campanha 

Guerrear 

Uma  peca  de  campanha 

Uma  forragem 

Quarteis  de  inverno 

Dar  quartel 

Aquartelar-se 

Marcliar 

Marchar  com  bandeiras  des- 

pregadas 
Tocar  a  recolher 


A  sally 

To  batter 

A  breach 

A  pontoon 

An  escalade 

An  assault 

To  storm 

To  take  by  storm 

The  chamade 

To  capitulate 

Capitulation 

Truce 

A  garrison 

A  provost 

A  levy 

To   raise   men,   to  levy  or 

raise  soldiers 
To  raise  the  siege 
To  decamp 
To  pitch  one's  camp 
A  flying  camp 
A  campaign 
To  begin  the  campaign,  to 

open  the  field 
To  fight 
A  field-piece 
A  forage 
Winter  quarters 
To  give  quarter 
To  take  quarter 
To  march 
To    march     with    flying 

colours 
To  beat  the  tattoo 


VOCABULARY. 


337 


Entregar  uma  pra$a 

Fila  da  vanguarda 

Fila  do  centra 

Fila  da  retaguarda 

Direita 

Esquerda 

Tempos 

Exercicio 

Fechos 

0  cdo,  or  perro  da  arma 

A  cronha 

A  boca  da  arma 

0  cano 

A  vareta 

0  gatilho 

Um  pellotao 

Uma  diviscw 

Linha,  orfileira 

Caqadores 

Flanco 

Estado  Maior 

Frente 

Infanteria  ligeira 

Regulamentos 


To  surrender  a  place 

Front  rank 

Centre  rank 

Rear  rank 

Right 

Left 

Motions 

Exercise 

Lock 

Cock 

The  butt 

The  muzzle 

The  barrel 

The  ramrod 

The  trigger 

A  platoon 

A  division 

Line 

Riflemen 

Flank 

Staff 

Front 

Light  infantry 

Regulations 


PALAVRAS    DB    COM  AN  DO. 

Sentido 

Armas  ao  hombro 
Descan^ar 
Metier  bayonetas 
Apresentar  armas 
Calar  bayonetas 


MILITARY    WORDS    OF 
COMMAND. 

Attention 
Shoulder  arms 
Order  arms 
Fix  bayonets 
Present  arms 
Charge  bayonets 


338 

Descanqar  annas 

Tirar  bayonetas 

Cruzar  armas 

Preparar 

Carregar 

Tirar  o  cartuxo 

Escorvar 

Tirar  as  varetas 

Atuchar  o  curtuxo 

Apontar 

Fogo 

Meter  o  cartuxo 

Fogo  por  pellotoes 

Fogo  defilas 

Alto 

Formar  em  linha 

Fogo  obliquo 

Formar 

Marcha 

Ordem  cerrada 

Desfilar 

Columna  cerrada 

Meia  volta  d  esquerda 

Voltar 


VOCABULARY. 


Cerrar  as  fileiras 

NAVEGA9AO. 

Um  navio  , 

Uma  ndo  de  guerra 

Um  navio  de  carga,  or  mer- 

cante 
Um  navio  veleiro 


Support  arms 

Unfix  bayonets 

Pile  arms 

Make  ready 

Load 

Handle  cartridge 

Prime 

Draw  ramrods 

Ram  down  cartridge 

Present 

Fire 

Cast  about 

Firing  by  platoons 

File-firing 

Halt 

To  form  in  line 

Oblique  firing 

Form 

March 

Close  order 

To  file 

Close  column 

Left  flank  wheel,  backward 

Wheel 

Advance 

Close  the  ranks 

NAVIGATION. 

A  ship 

A  line-of-battle  ship 

A    merchant-ship,    a    mer- 
chantman 

A  very  good  sailer,  or  a 
ship  that  sails  well 


VOCABULARY. 


339 


Um  navio  ronceiro 

Uma  fragata 

Uma  fusta 

Uma  pina^a 

Uma  barca  de  passagem 

Um  barco 

Uma  barca 

Uma  canoa 

Uma  gondola 

Um  esquife 

Uma  cJialupa  or  balandra 

Uma  cJialupa  pequena 

Um  lergantim 

Uma  balsa 

0  navio  almirante 

Uma  armada 

Uma  frota 

Uma  esquadra 

A  bordo 

A  popa 

A  proa 

Pe<(-as  de  proa  para  dar 

ao  inimigo 
Uma  tartana 
Um  brulote 
Uma  falua 
Uma  caravela 

Embarcacdo   pequena    para 
de   um    navio   de 


guerra 

Um  guarda  costa 
Um  cruzador 
Um  corsario 
Um  Jdate 


A  bad  sailer 

A  frigate 

A  foist 

A  pinnace 

A  ferry-boat 

A  boat 

A  barque 

A  canoe 

A  gondola 

A  skiff 

A  sloop 

A  shallop 

A  brigantine 

A  raft 

The  admiral's  ship 

A  fleet,  a  navy 

A  fleet  of  merchant  ships 

A  squadron,  part  of  a  fleet 

On  board 

The  poop,  stern,  or  steerage 

The  prow  or  head 

Chase  guns 

A  tartan 
A  fire-ship 
A  felucca 
A  caravel 
A  tender 


A  guard-ship 
A  cruiser 
A  privateer 
A  yacht 


340 


VOCABULARY. 


Um  navio  de  transports 

Uma  ndo  da  India  oriental 

Uma  ndo  da  India  occidental 

Um  navio  para  levar  carvdo 

Embarcaqdes  pequenas 

Uma  falua 

Embarcaqao  de  avizo 

Um  paquete 

Um  bar co  de  pescar 

Uma  lancka 

Os  remos 

A  pa  do  remo 

A  sentina 

0  lastro 

Alastrar  o  navio 

Um  mastro  or  arvore 

0  mastro  grande 

0  mastro  de  mezena 

0  mastro  do  traquete 

0  gurupes 

A  gdvea 

A  quilha 

A  verga  or  entena 

A    laiz,  or  extremidade  das 

vergas 
As  pranchas  que  cobrem  os 

costados  do  navio  da  parte 

de  fora 
Uma  vela* 
Uma  vela  mestra,  or  a  vela 

do  mastro  grande 
A  vela  da  gdvea 


A  transport 

East-Iiidiaman 

West-Indiamaii 

A  collier 

Small  craft 

A  barge 

Advice-boat 

A  packet-boat 

A  fishing-boat 

A  lighter 

The  oars 

The  blade  of  the  oar 

The  well 

The  ballast 

To  ballast  a  ship 

A  mast 

The  main-mast 

The  mizen 

The  fore-mast 

The  bowsprit  or  boltsprit 

The    round-top,     main-top,. 

or  scuttle  of  a  mast 
The  keel 
The  yard 
The  yard-arm 

The  side  planks  or  side  of  a 
ship 

A  sail 

The  main-sheet 

The  main-top-sail 


By  vela  is  often  meant  the  ship  itself. 


VOCABULARY. 


341 


A  vela  de  joanete  do  mastro 

grande 
•Os  papafigos 
A  mezena 
A  gata,  or  vela  de  cima  da 

mezena 
•O  traquete 
O  velacho 

0  joanete  do  traquete 
A  cevadeira 
A  ve"la  latina 
Fazer  for^a  de  vela 
Os  mastarfos 

<0a  mastareo  da  mezena,  or 

mastareo  da  gata 
Uma  poi*tinhola 
As  bandeiras 

Asflammulas,  or  galhardetes 
A  agulha  de  marear 
A  bitdcola 
As  costuras  do  navio 
0  time 

A  cana  do  leme 
A  cuberta 
Cuberta  corrida 
As  escotilhas 
Um  escotilhao 

'O  castello  de  popa 
'0  castello  de  proa 
•Garrar  a  ancora 

A  ancora 


The  main-top-gallant-sail 

The  mizen  and  fore-sail 
The  mizen-sail 
The  mizen-top-sail 

The  fore-sail 
The  fore-top-sail 
The  fore-top-gallant-sail 
The  sprit-sail 
A  shoulder-of-mutton-sail 
To  crowd  the  sail 
The  top-mast,  or  top-gallant- 
masts 
The  mizen-top-mast 

A  port-hole 

The  colours 

The  streamers,  pendants 

The  mariner's  compass 

The  binnacle 

The  seams  of  a  ship 

The  helm  or  rudder 

The  whip  or  whip-staff 

The  deck 

Flush  fore  and  aft 

The  hatches  or  scuttles 

A  room  by  the  hatches  to 

keep  the  provisions  in 
The  quarter-deck 
The  forecastle 
To  drive,   or  for  a  ship  to 

drag  her  anchor 
The  anchor 


342 


VOCABULARY. 


Meter  a  ancora  dentro 

Uma  ancora  de  roboque 

A  ancora  de  esperanqa 

As  unhas  da  ancora 

A  argola  da  ancora 

Estar  a  ancora  a  pique 

Uma  amarra 

Picar  or  cortar  as  amarras 

A  sonda  or  prumo 

Os  cutelos 

A  mare 

Uma  bozina 

Preparar  um  navio  de  velas, 

cor  das,  &c. 
Um  piloto 
Um  escrivdo 
Pilotagem 
A  cartel  de  marear 
Um  capitdo 
0  capitdo  tenente 
Um  contramestre 
Um  marinheiro 
Um  camarote 
Marinheiro  que  e  camarada 

ou    pertence     ao     mesmo 

rancho 

Uma  tormenta 
Uma  borrasca 
Bonanza 
Calmaria 
Vento  em  popa 

i 
Navio  arrasado  em  popa 


To  weigh  the  anchor 

A  kedger 

The  sheet  anchor 

The  flukes  of  the  anchor 

The  ring  of  the  anchor 

The  anchor  to  be  a-peak: 

A  cable 

To  cut  the  cables 

The  sounding-lead 

The  studding-sails 

The  tide 

A  speaking-trumpet 

To  rig  a  ship 

A  pilot 

A  purser 

Pilotage 

The  sea-chart 

A  captain 

The  first  lieutenant 

A  boatswain 

A  sailor 

A  cabin 

A  messmate 


A  tempest 

A  storm 

Fair  weather 

Calm 

The    wind     full    astern,    a 

fore-wind 
A  ship  that  sails  before  the 

wind 


VOCABULARY. 


343 


A  derrota 
Alar  a  bolina 

IT  pela  bolina 

N6  da  bolina 
Barlavento 
Ganhar  o  barlavento 
JBarlaventear,    or    deitar   a 

barlavento 
Sotavento 
Escovens 
Escotas 
Velame,    cordas,    e    o    mais 

que  e  necessario  para  pre- 

parar  um  navio 
Uma  corda 
As  enxarcias 
Arribar 
Bombordo 
Estibordo 
Lo 
Meter  de  16 

Uma  bomba 

Dar  d  bomba 

Balde  para  deitar  agoa  na 

bomba 

0  pistdo  da  bomba 
0  bra^o  da  bomba 
Um  farol 
0  vento 


The  course  or  way  of  a 
ship 

To  tighten  the  main  bow- 
line, to  haul  up  the  bow- 
line 

To  tack  upon  a  wind,  sail 
upon  a  bowline 

The  bowline  knot 

Windward 

To  catch  the  wind 

To  ply  to  windward 

Leeward 
Hawsers 
Tacks 

Tackle  or  tackling,  the 
rigging  of  a  ship 

A  rope 

The  shrouds 

To  put  into  harbour 

Larboard 

Starboard 

Luff 

To   luff  or  keep   the   ship 

nearer  the  wind 
A  pump 
To  pump 
A  pump-can 

The  sucker  of  a  pump 
The  pump-handle 
A  light,lantem,or  lighthouse 
The  wind 


344 


VOCABULARY. 


ROSA  DA  AGULHA,  OT  DOS 
VENTOS. 

Norte 

Norte  4a  a  nordeste 

Nor-nordeste 

Nordeste  4a  a  norte 

Nordeste 

Nordeste  4a  a  leste 

Les-nordeste 

Leste  4a  a  nordeste 

Leste 

Leste  4a  a  sueste 

Les-sueste 

Sueste  4a  a  leste 

Sueste 

Sueste  4a  a  sul 

£u-sueste 

Sul  4a  a  sueste 

Sul 

Sul  4a  a  sudoeste 

Su-sudoeste 

Sudoeste  4a  sul 

Sudoeste 

Sudoeste  4a  a  oeste 

Oes-sudoeste 

Oeste  4a  a  sudoeste 

Oeste 

Oeste  4a  a  noroeste 

Oes-noroeste 

Noroeste  4a  a  oeste 

^Noroeste 

Noroeste  4a  a  norte 

Nor-noroeste 


THE    FLY   OF    THE   MARINER'S 
COMPASS. 

North 

N.  by  E. 

N.  N.  E. 

N.  E.  by  N. 

N.  E. 

N.  E.  by  E. 

E.  N.  E. 

E.  by  N. 

East 

E.  by  S. 

E.  S.  E. 

S.  E.  by  E. 

S.  E. 

S.  E.  by  S. 

S.  S.  E. 

S.  by  E. 

South 

S.  by  W. 

S.  S.  W. 

S.  W.  by  S. 

S.  W. 

S.  W.  by  W. 

W.  S.  W. 

W.  by  S. 

West 

W.  by  N. 

W.  N.  W. 

N.  W.  by  W. 

N.  W. 

N.  W.  by  N. 

N.  N.  W. 


VOCABULARY. 


345 


Norte  4a  a  noroeste 
Vento  travessdo  or  travessia 
Dar  a  embarca^ao  a  travez 
Pairar 

Espordo 

ColJier  um  cdbo 

Largar  mats  cabo 

Abrir  agoa 

Fazer  agoada 

Arpar  um  navio 

Fatexa 

Peda^o   de   lona    breada  que 
se  poe  ao  redor  do  mastro 
e  das  bombas  para  que  a 
agoa  ndo  penetre 

Passador 

Cor  da  com  que  se  prende  o 
bote,  or  lancha  d  popa  do 
navio 

Um  apito 

As  abadernas 

Uma  abita 

Emproar 


Guinar  o  navio 

Parte  superior  or  mais  alta 

da  popa  de  um  navio 
As  apagafanoes 
As  arreigadas 
Os  toioes 
As  varredouras 


N.  by  W. 
Contrary  wind 
To  hull 

To  ply  backwards  and  for- 
wards on  one  station 
Beak 

To  coil  a  cable 
To  pay  out  more  cable 
To  leak  or  spring  a  leak 
To  take  in  fresh  water 
To  grapple  a  ship 
Grapple 
Tarpaulin 


A   fidd   or   pin  of   iron  to 
open  the  strands  of  ropes 
A  boat-rope 


A  boatswain's  call 

The  nippers 

The  bits 

To  steer  right  forward,  to 

turn   the   prow   straight 

forward 
To  tack 
Taffrail 

The  leech-lines 
The  puttocks 
The  bunt-lines 
The  bow-studding-sails 


346  VOCABULARY. 


0  bartidouro 

Os  bastardos 

Uma  bigota 

Os  botalos 

Bracear 

Os  bracks 

0  bragueiro  or  vergueiro 

Os  brandaes 

As  bu^ardas 

As  cacholas 

0  cadaste 

Um  cadernal 

As  cavemas 
Os  colhedores 
Compassar  um  navio 
Os  cossouros 
A  craca 

0  cabrestante 

Dar  ca$a 

As  curvas 

Os  enbomaes 

0  pordo 

Uma  maca 

0  convez 

0  camarote  do  cirurgiao 

0  frete 

A  cargo, 

Ordem  que  o  capitdo  recebe 

para  dar  a  vela 
Desembarque 
Embargo 
Ancoragem 


The  boat's-skit 

The  parrels 

A  dead-eye 

The  studding-sail-booms 

To  brace 

The  braces 

The  rudder's  rope 

The  backstays 

The  breast-hooks 

The  cheeks 

The  stand-post 

A  large   block   with    more 

than  one  shrive 
The  floor-timbers 
The  lines  of  the  shrouds 
To  trim  a  ship 
The  trucks 
The  foulness  of  the  ship's 

bottom 
The  capstan 
To  chase 
The  knees 
The  scupper-holes 
The  hold  of  a  ship 
A  hammock 
The  deck 
The  cockpit 
The  freight 
The  cargo 
Sailing  orders 

Landing 

Embargo 

Anchorage 


VOCABULARY. 


347 


Batalha  naval 

Uma  caravela  mexeriqueira 

or  de  espia 
Arriar  or  arrear 
Arrear  as  velas 
Arrear  bandeira 
Levantar  ferro,  levar  ancoras, 

levar   ferro,    levar-se    or 

levar 
Leva 

Eolear 


A  pe$a  de  leva 

Rebocar  or  levar  de  reboque 

Fazer  costuras 

A  pcLSsayem 

Um  passageiro 

Uma  viagem 

Navio  cujo  capitdo  tern  car- 

tas  de  corso 
Querenar  um  navio 
Brear  as  costuras  do  navio 

Dar  d  costa 
Soluqar  a  ndo 
Naufragar 

Naufragio 

Um    patrao,    or   mestre   de 

embarcac(do 
Um  carpenteiro  de  navios 


Naval  battle 
A  look-out  ship 

To  veer 
The  furl  a  sail 
To  strike  the  flag 
To  weigh  anchor 


The  action  of  weighing  or 
taking  up  the  anchor 

To   move   a  gun  towards 
starboard  or  larboard 

The  signal  gun 

To  tow 

To  splice 

The  passage 

A  passenger 

A  voyage 

Letters  of  marque 

To  careen  a  ship 

To   pitch   the   seams   of  a 

ship 
To    run    a-ground    or    on. 

shore 
A  ship  to  roll,  or  to  float  in 

rough  water 
To   suffer   a   wreck,   to  be- 

wrecked 
Shipwreck 
The  shipmaster 

The  shipwright 


348 


VOCABULARY. 


Estaleiro 

Embarcar 

Embarcar-se 

JJm  grumete 

Mo$o  da  camara 

Um  calafate 

Calafetar  um  navio 

0  calafeto 

Um  arsenal  or  ribeira  das 

ndos 
Emmastear  um  navio 

Remar 

Um  remador 

0  despenseiro 

Os   marinheiros,    e    toda   a 

outra  gente  que  pertence  ao 

navio,  Tripula^ao 
A  guarnicfio  da  ndo 


A  balestllha 

0  quadrante 

Outante 

De  re 

Paravante 

A  situa^ao  de  uma  costa, 
ilka,  &c.,  a  respeito  de 
qualquer  outro  lugar 

•Quarentena 

Baliza 

Larga 

Amarar 


Ship-yard 

To  ship 

To    go     aboard,    to    take 

shipping 

A  boy  (of  the  crew) 
A  cabin  boy 
A  caulker 
To  caulk  a  ship 
The  oakum 
An  arsenal  or  dockyard 

To  fit  a  ship,  or  vessel,  with 

masts 
To  row 
A  rower 
The  steward 
The  crew  of  a  ship 


The  crew  and  marines  who 
serve  on  board  a  man-of- 
war 

The  cross-staff 

The  quadrant 

Hadley's  quadrant 

Aft 

Fore 

The  bearing 


Quarantine 

Sea-mark 

Large 

To  bear  off 


VOCABULARY. 


Cacar  a  vela 
Cacear  um  navio 


Lancar  um   navio  ao   mar 
Entrar   com   vento  fresco   e 

bom  no  porto 
Bordo 

Bordo  or  banda 
Uma  ca$a 

Uma  presa  or  tomadia 
Estar  de  vergadalto 
Ventos  de  monc(do  or  geraes 
Andar  de  conserva 

Dar  or  fazer  um  bordo 


Estar  d  capa,    or  por-se   d 
capa 


To   turn    the    sail    to    the 

windward 
It  is  said  of  a  ship  that  is 

hurried   away  from    her 

course  by  strong  winds, 

tides,  &c. 
To  launch  a  ship 
To  bear  in  the  harbour 

Tack 

Broadside 

A  chase 

A  prize  or  capture 

To  stand  for  the  offing 

Trade  winds 

To  keep  company  together, 

to  sail  under  a  convoy 
To  tack  the  ship,  or  tack 

about,    or   to    bring   her 

head  about 
To  lie  by  at  sea,  to  back 

the  sails 


DO    COMMERCIO,  E    DO    QUB        OF   TRADE,    AND    OF   THINGS 
LHE    PERTENCE.  RELATING    TO    IT. 


Conta 

Conta  de  venda 
Fazer  uma  conta 
Pedir  contas 
Dar  d  conta 
Conta  corrente 
Dinheiro  de  contado 
Fundos  publicos 


Account 
Account  of  sales 
To  cast  up  an  account 
To  call  to  an  account 
To  pay  on  account 
Account  current 
Ready  money 
Stocks 


-350 


VOCABULARY. 


0  que   negocea  em  comprar     A  jobber 

e  vender  acfies 
O  ballanco 
Um  fardo 
Um  banco 
Um  banqueiro 
•Quebra 

Falido  or  quebrado 
Ajuste  or  concerto 
Troca 
Portador 
Lancador 
Letra  de  cambio 
Negociar     uma      letra      de 

cambio 
Partida 
Conhecimento 
Escriptura  de  obrigaqao 
Guarda-livros,  or  o  que  em 

uma  casa  de  negocio  tern  a 

sen  cargo  os  livros 
Occupacdo  or  negocio 
Comprador 
Dinheiro 
Porte  or  carreto 
•O  caixa  or  o  que  guarda  a 

caijca 
Cento 
Certiddo 
-Cambio 
Freguez 
•Gastos 
Barato 
•Caro 
Despacho  da  alfandega 


The  balance 

A  bale 

A  bank 

A  banker 

Bankruptcy 

Bankrupt 

Bargain 

Barter 

Bearer 

Bidder 

Bill  of  exchange 

To     negotiate     a    bill     of 

exchange 
Parcel 

Bill  of  lading 
Bond,  engagement 
Book-keeper 


Business 

Buyer 

Cash 

Carriage 

The  cashier  or  cash-keeper 


Cent 

Certificate 

Change,  exchange 

Customer 

Charges 

Cheap 

Dear 

Clearance 


VOCABULARY. 


351 


•Commissao 

Mercancias 

Compromisso 

Consignar(do 

Consumo 

Conteudo 

Contracto 

Um  correspondente 

Preqo 

A  alfandega 

Os  guardas  d\tlfandc</a 

Guardas  que  estdo  vigiando 
ate  que  os  navios  estejdo 
descarregados 

Uma  fritoria 

Um  escriptorio 

•Credito 

Um  credor 

•Corrmto 

Costume 

Um  contractador 

Trafego  or  negocio 

Divida 

Um  devedor 

Dinlieiro  desembolcado 

Desconto 

Deposito 

Direitos  que  a  alfandega 
torna  a  dar  aos  exporta- 
dores  de  certas  fazendas, 
que  jd  os  tinhao  pago  na 
supposi^do  de  serem  para 
consumo  interior  :  servin- 
do  isto  para  animar  o 
•com?nercio 


Commission 

Merchandise 

Compromise 

Consignment 

Consumption 

Contents 

Contract 

A  correspondent 

Price,  rate 

The  custom-house 

The  custom-house  officers 

Tide-waiters 


A  factory,  settlement 

A  counting-house  or  office 

Credit 

A  creditor 

Current 

Custom 

A  contractor 

Traffic  or  business 

Debt 

A  debtor 

Disbursement 

Discount 

Deposit 

Drawback 


352 


VOCABULARY. 


Copia 

Corretor 

Corretor  de  letras  de  cambio 

Assegurador  or  segurador 

Endosse 

Endossador 

Levantamento  de  prego 

Entrada 

Equivalence 

Exigencia 

Despeza 

Exportac(ao 

Extorsao 

Feitor  or  commissario 

Feira 

Fio   or   arame   no    qual  se 

enjwio  os  papeis  n'um  es- 

criptorio 

QuatrOj  cinco,  &c.,  por  cento 
Frete 

Fretar  um  navio 
Fundos 
Ganho 
0  que  ganha 
Fazendas  or  effeitos 
Estrea 
Escriptura 
Direitos  d'  entrada 

Importador 

Renda 

Interesse 

Correspondencia 

Inventario 


Duplicate 

Broker 

Stockbroker 

Insurer  or  underwriter 

Endorsement 

Endorser 

Enhancement 

Entry 

Equivalent 

Exigency 

Expense 

Export  or  exportation 

Extortion 

Factor 

Fair 

File  fpr  papers 


Four,  five,  &c.,  per  cent 
Freight 

To  charter  a  ship 
Funds 

Gain  or  profit 
Gainer 

Goods,  effects 
Handsel 
Deed 

A  duty  on  imported  com- 
modities 
Importer 
Income 
Interest 
Correspondence 
Inventory 


VOCABULARY. 


353 


Insolvencia 

Factura 

Escriptura  de  arrendamento 

Arrendador 

Livro  de  razao 

Emprestimo 

Dinheiro  emprestado 

Carta 

Sobrescripto  da  carta 

Fechar  uma  carta  com  sinete 

Mala  em  que  o  correio  traz 

as  cartas 
Hypotlieca 
Credor  hypothecario 
Fiador 
Pagamento 
Falta  de  pagamento 
Nota  promissoria 
Dona 
Pacote 
Serapilkeira 
Bar 'bant 'e 
J/rtfo  de  cartas 
Companheiro  de   alguem  no 

neyocio,  or  socio 
Sociedade,    or  companhia   no 

negocio 
Penhor 

Aposite  de  segura 
Seguro 

Protestar  uma  letra 
Aceitar  uma  letra 
Protesto 
Sacar  uma  letra 


Insolvency 

Invoice 

Lease 

Lessee 

Ledger 

Loan 

Money  lent 

Letter 

The  direction  of  a  letter 

To  fold  and  seal  a  letter 

Mail 

Mortgage 
Mortgagee 
Bail 

Payment 
Non-payment 
Note  or  promissory  note- 
Owner 

Pack,  a  truss 
Pack  cloth,  wrapper 
Pack-thread 
Packet  of  letters 
Partner 

Partnership 

Pawn  or  pledge 

Policy  of  insurance 

Insurance 

To  protest  a  bill 

To  accept  a  bill 

Protest 

To  draw  a  bill 

AA 


354 


VOCABULARY. 


Correio 

Correio  que  leva  cartas 

Porte  de  cartas 

Primagem 

Capital 

Perdas  e  damnos 

Importancia 

Importancia  liquida 

Promessa 

Bens 

Pontualidade 

Compra 

Recibo 

Recambio 

Arbitro  or  louvado 

Louvamento  or  arbitrio 

Quitaqao 

Remessa 

Venda  das  coisas  por  miudo, 

como  fazem  os  mercadores 

de  retalho 

Mercador  de  retalho 
Riquezas 
Venda 
Padrao 
Amostra 
Sinete 
Lacre 

Ajuste  de  contas 
Logista 

Contrabandista 
Fazenda  de  contrabando 

Fazer  contrabando 


Post-office 

Postman  or  letter-carrier 

Postage 

Primage 

Capital 

Losses  and  damages 

Proceeds 

Net  proceeds 

Promise 

Property 

Punctuality 

Purchase 

Receipt 

Re-exchange 

Referee  or  arbitrator 

Reference 

Release 

Remittance 

Retail 


Retailler 
Riches,  wealth 
Sale 

A  pattern 
Sample 
Seal 

Sealing-wax 
Settlement  of  accounts 
Shop-keeper 
Smuggler 

Contraband,    goods    smug- 
gled 
To  smuggle 


VOCABULARY. 


355 


Modelo,   or  fiel  dos  pezos  e 

medidas  publicas 
Armazem 
Subscrip$do 
Tara 

Fazenda  ruim 
Eisco 
Juros 
Usurario 
Usura 
Mercancias 
Valor 
Avaria 
Direitos 

Tributo  or  contribui^ao 
Sisa 
Siseiro 
Cdes 
Direito    que   se   paga    por 

desembarcar  fazendas   no 

cdes 
Collector   do   mesmo  direito 

or  tribute 
Dizimos 

Dizimador  or  dizimeiro 
Lou$a  vidrada,  sem  ser  da 

China 

Mercador  de  atacador 
Venda   que   se  faz  por  ata- 

cado 


Standard  measure 

Warehouse 

Subscription 

Tare 

Trashy  goods 

Risk 

Interest 

Usurer 

Usuiy 

Merchandise 

Worth  or  value 

Average 

Duties  or  custom 

Cess,  tribute 

Excise 

Exciseman 

Wharf 

Wharfage 


Wharfinger 

Tithes 

Tithe-gatherer 

Dutch-ware 

Wholesale  dealer 
Wholesale 


356 


VOCABULARY. 


DA    MOEDA   Or   DINHEIRO 
PORTUGUEZ. 

*Real 

Des  reis 

Vintem 

Tostao,  or  5  vintens 

2  tostoes 

4  tostoes,  or  um  crusado 
Crusado  novo,  or  24  vintens 

5  tostoes 

10  tostoes,  or  1000  reis 

Um   quartinho   de   oiro>    or 

1200  reis 
16  tostoes 

Meia  moeda  de  oiro 
3200,  or  32  tostoes 
Moeda  de  oiro  de  4800 
Pe$a  de  8000 
Dobrao,  or  12,800 

This  mark  is  prefixed 


OF    THE    PORTUGUESE 
COIN. 

A  ree,  equal  to  ^f^d. 
10  rees,  f^d. 
A  vintin,  l^d. 
A  testoon,  6|d 
Two  testoons,  Is.  1  ^d. 
A  crusade,  2s.  3d. 
A  new  crusade,  2s.  8§ 
Five  testoons,  2s.  9|c£. 
10  testoons,  5s.  l\d. 
12  testoons,  6s.  9d. 

16  testoons,  9s. 
Half  moidore,  13s.  Qd. 
32  testoons,  18s. 
A  moidore,  II.  7s. 
Joanese,  21.  5s. 
128  testoons,  31.  12s. 
to  the  imaginary  money. 


357 


A  COLLECTION 

OF 

PORTUGUESE   PROVERBS. 


A  agoa  o  ddt  a  ogoa  o  leva 
Na  agoa  revolta  pesca  o  pes- 
cador 

Estd  como  o  peixe  ri  agoa 
Trazer  a  agoa  para  o  seu 

moinho 

Levar  agoa  ao  mar 
As  agoas  estao  baixas 
0  que  ndo  pode  ser,  deve-se 

soffrer 

Come  como  um  alarve 
Alazdo  tostado  antes   morto 

que  canqado 
Uma    desgraqa    alcanna    a 

outra 
Estar  na  aldea,  e  ndo  ver  as 

casas 


Quern  trdbalha  tern  alfaia 


Lightly  come,  lightly  go 
To  fish  in  troubled  waters 

(to    make    a   benefit    of 

public  troubles) 
He  lives  in  clover 
To  bring  grist  to  the  mill 

To  carry  coals  to  Newcastle 
He  or  she  is  at  a  low  ebb 
What  cannot  be  cured  must 

be  endured 

He  eats  like  a  thresher 
A  dark  sorrel  horse  will  die 

before  he  will  stop 
Misfortune     never     comes 

alone 

We  say,  you  cannot  see 
wood  for  trees ;  or  to  be 
like  the  butcher  that 
looked  for  his  knife  when 
he  had  it  in  his  mouth 
He  that  works  has  furniture 


358 


PROVERBS. 


Fallo-lhe  em  alhos,  responde- 

me  em  bugalhos 
Em  tempo  nevado  o  alko  vale 

um  cavallo 


Sua  alma,  na  sua  palma 
Quern  ama  a  beltrao,  ama  a 

sen  cdo 
Cada   qual   ama   sen   seme- 

Ihante 
Tambem  os  amea^ados  comem 

pao 

Contas  de  perto,  e  amigos  de 

longe 
Tdo  bom  e  Pedro  como  sen 

amo 
Furtar  o  carneiro,  e  dar  os 

pes  pelo  amor  de  Deos 

Nem  um  dedo  faz  mdo,  nem 
uma  andorinha  verao 

Levar  palhas  e  aralhas 
Na  area  aberta  o  justo  pecca 

De  um  argueiro,  fazer   um 
cavaleiro 


I  talk  of  chalk,  and  you  of 
cheese 

Garlic  in  foggy  weather  is 
as  good  as  a  horse ;  it 
means  that  garlic  is  a 
good  defence  for  travel- 
lers against  the  dampness 
and  cold  weather 

As  stiff  as  garlic ;  that  is,  a 
healthy,  strong,  robust 
person 

As  you  brew,  even  so  bake 

Love  me,  love  my  dog 

Like  will   to   like,  or  like 

loves  like 
Threatened  folks  eat  bread ; 

we  say,  threatened  folks 

live  long 
Short  reckonings  make  long 

friends 
Like  master,  like  man 

We  say,  to  steal  the  goose, 
and  give  the  giblets  in 
alms 

One  swallow  does  not  make 
a  summer.  Una  hirundo 
non  facit  ver,  says  Horace 

To  sweep  stakes 

That  is,  it  is  opportunity 
that  makes  the  thief 

We  say,  to  make  mountains 
of  mole-hills 


PROVERBS. 


350 


Com  arte  e  com  engano  se 
vive  meio  anno  ;  com  en- 
gano  e  com  arte  se  vive  a 
outra  parte 

Quern  a  boa  arvore  se  chega, 
boa  sombra  o  cobre 

Asno   que  tern  fome,  cardos 

come 
Sopa  de  met  ndo  se  fez  para 

a  boca  do  asno 
Mais  quero  asno  que  me  leve, 

que  cavallo  que  me  derrube 

Mais  valemd  avenqa  que  boa 

sentenqa 
Ndo  deites  azeite  no  fogo 

Da  mdo  d  boca  se  perde  a 

sopa 
Em  boca  cerrada  nao  entra 

mosca 
Quern  tern  boca  vai  a  Roma 


Pela  boca  morre  o  peixe 

Cada  bufarinlieiro  louva  seus 

alfinetes 
Quern    tern    quatro,   e   gasta 

cinco,  ndo  ha  mister  bolsa 

n.em  bolsinho 
Cobra  vat  pela  vinha,  por 

onde  vai  a  mdi  vai  a  Jilha 


That  is,  all  a  man's  life  is  a 
deceit 


That  is,  he  that  relies  on 
good  worthy  people  reaps 
a  benefit 

We  say,  hungry  dogs  will 
eat  dirty  pudding 

Good  things  are  not  fit  for 
fools 

Better  be  an  old  man's  dar- 
ling than  a  young  man's 
slave 

It  is  better  to  agree  at  any 
cost  than  go  to  law 

Do  not  throw  oil  into  the 
fire 

Many  a  slip  between  the 
cup  and  the  lip 

A  close  mouth  catches  no 
flies 

That  is,  a  man  may  go  any- 
where if  he  has  a  tongue 
to  speak  and  ask  his  way 

Much  taking  brings  much 
woe 

Every  man  thinks  his  own 
geese  swans 

He  that  hath  four  and 
spends  five  hath  no  need 
of  a  purse 

Like  father,  like  son 


360 


PROVERBS. 


Matar  dois   coelhos  de  uma 

cajadada 
Quern     canta,    sens    males 

espanta 
Deitar  a  capa  ao  toiro 


Viva  el-rei,  e  dd  cd  a  capa 


Andar  de  capa  cahida 

0  cdo  com  raiva  de  sen  dono 
trava 


Quern  com  caes  se  lan^a,  com 

pulgas  se  levanta 
A  came  de  lobo  dmte  de  cdo 


A   cavallo  dado  ndo  olhes  o 
denle 


We  say,  to  kill  two  birds 
with  one  stone 

The  person  who  sings  makes 
easy  his  misfortunes 

To  throw  one's  cloak  at  the 
bull ;  that  is,  to  venture 
all  a  man  has  to  save  his 
life 

Let  the  king  live,  and  give 
me  the  cloak ;  that  is, 
spoken  of  persons  who, 
under  a  pretence  of  au- 
thority, rob  and  plunder 
other  people,  and  at  the 
same  time  pretend  they 
are  doing  justice  to  the 
power  reposed  in  their 
hands 

To  be  behindhand  in  the 
world 

A  mad  dog  bites  its  own 
master ;  there  is  no  trust- 
ing to  madmen  or  people 
in  a  rage 

We  say,  sleep  with  beggars 
and  you  will  get  fleas 

That  is,  to  return  railing 
for  railing;  or,  as  our 
modern  proverb  says, 
give  him  a  Roland  for 
his  Oliver;  the  Latins 
say,  par  pari  referre 

Never  look  in  the  mouth  of 
a  gift  horse 


PROVERBS. 


361 


Quern  faz  casa  na  pra^a,  uns 
dizem  que  e?  alta,  outros 
que  £  baixa 


Quern  quer  cavallo  sem  tacha, 

sem  elle  se  acha 
Cobra  boafama,  e  deita-te  a 

dormir 
Fazer  as  contas  sem  a  hospeda 


Em  casa  do  ladrao  ndo  falles 
em  corda 


Do  coiro  the  sahem  as  correias 


Cortar  o  vcstido  conforme  o 

panno 
Cria  o  corvo,  tirarvos-ha  o 

olho 


Tanta   culpa   tern  o  ladrao 

como  o  consentidor 
Dddivas  quebrantao  penhas 


That  is,  a  man  in  public 
business  cannot  please 
everybody ;  or,  as  So- 
lon says,  it  is  rare  that 
statesmen  can  please  all 
men 

It  is  a  good  horse  that  never 
stumbles 

When  your  name  is  up,  you 
may  lie  in  bed  till  noon 

To  reckon  without  the  hos- 
tess ;  or,  as  we  say,  the 
host 

You  should  not  mention  a 
halter  to  any  whose  re- 
lations or  friends  have 
suffered  by  it ;  that  is, 
no  man  should  be  re- 
minded of  the  subject  of 
his  disgrace 

The  thongs  come  out  of  his 
skin ;  that  is,  he  pays  for 
it 

To  cut  one's  coat  according 
to  the  cloth 

It  is  said  of  a  person  that, 
being  received  in  distress, 
shows  ingratitude  to  those 
who  relieved  him 

The,  receiver  is  as  bad  as 
the  thief 

Gifts  break  rocks :  that  is, 
kindness  overcomes  the 
hardest  hearts 


362 


PROVERBS. 


Melhor  e  fazer  debalde  que 
estar  debalde 

Deitar  azeite  no  fogo 


Ndo  e  o  demo  tdo  feio  como 

o  pintdo 
Primeiro  estdo  os  denies,  que 

parentes 


La  vai  a  lingoa,  onde  o  dente 

grita 
Quando  cuidas  meter  o  dente 

em  seguro,  topards  o  duro 


Dar  com  a  lingoa  nos  denies 
Ventura   te   de   Deus,  fillio  ; 
que  saber  pouco  te  basta 


Cada  qual  por  si,  e  Deus  por 

todos 
Em  bons  dias,  boas  obras 

Para  dia  de  sdo  cerejo 


It  is  better  to  work  for 
nothing  than  to  be  lazy 
and  do  nothing  at  all 

To  make  bad  worse.  Ho- 
race says,  Oleum  addere 
camino 

We  say,  the  lion  is  not  so 
fierce  as  his  picture 

We  say,  near  is  my  coat, 
but  nearer  is  my  skin, 
&c.  Terence  says,  Heus 
proximus  sum  egomet 
mild 

To  scratch  where  it  itches 

Harm  watch,   harm  catch, 
Horace  says  : 
— et  fragili  qucerens  illi- 

dere  dentem 
Offendet  solido 

To  denounce  oneself,  to  belie 

God  give  you  good  luck, 
child,  for  a  little  learning- 
will  serve  your  turn ;  be- 
cause it  is  fortune  that 
raises  men  more  than 
merit 

Every  one  for  himself,  and 
God  for  all 

The  better  days  the  better 
deeds 

We  say,  when  two  Sundays 
come  together,  that  is — 
never 


PROVERBS. 


363 


Tudo  pode  o  dinheiro 

0   homem    propoe,    e    Deus 

dispoe 

Dorme  como  um  arganaz 
A    bom    entendedor   poucas 

palavras  bastdo 
Gato  escaldado  de  agoa  fria 

ha  medo 
No  escudellar  verds  quern  te 

quer  bem,  ou  mal 

Esmolou   sao    Matheus,    es- 

molou  para  os  sens 
Ndo  ha  melhor  espelho  que  o 

amigo  velho 


Nem  estopa  com  tiroes,  nem 
mulher  com  varoes 


Foliar  sem  cuidar,  e  atirar 
sem  apontar 


Falla  pouco  e  bem,  ter-te-hdo 
por  alguem 


Quern  a  fama  tern  perdida, 
morto  anda  rfesta  vida 


Money  governs  the  world 
Man     proposes,    and    God 

disposes 

He  sleeps  like  a  dormouse 
A    word    to    the    wise    is 

enough 
We    say,    a     burnt    child 

dreads  the  fire 
That  is,  people's  affections 

are  discovered  by   their 

liberality 
Charity  begins  at  home 

There  is  no  better  look- 
ing-glass than  an  old 
friend ;  that  is,  such  a 
one  will  not  flatter  a 
man,  but  tell  him  the 
truth 

That  is,  conversation  of 
women  is  dangerous ;  it 
is  not  safe  to  play  with 
edged  tools 

To  let  one's  tongue  run 
without  reflecting  on 
what  one  says  is  like 
shooting  at  random 

Talk  little  and  well,  and 
you  will  be  counted 
somebody ;  that  is,  you'll 
be  esteemed 

He  who  has  lost  his  repu- 
tation is  as  good  as  dead 
whilst  living 


364 


PROVERBS. 


A  quern  md  fama  tern,  nem 
accompanlies,  nem  digas 
bem 

Aproveitador  de  farelos, 
esperdipador  de  farinha 


Nao  fazem  boa  farinka 
Quern  md  afaz  nellajaz 
Agora  dd  pdo  e  mel,  e  de- 

pois  dard  pdo  e  fel 
Lingoa  doce  como  mel,  e  co- 

raqdo  amargoso  como  fel 
Eater   o  ferro  quando  estd 

quente 

Quern,    com    fero    mata,    a 

ferro  morre 
Carregador  de  ferro,  carre- 

gado  de  medo 


Quern  te  fazfesta,  ndo  soendo- 
asfazer,  ou  te  querenganar, 
ou  te  ha  mister 


Ndo  fies,  nem  pro  fie s,  nem 
arrendes,  vivirds  entre  as 
gentes 


Do  not  keep  company  with, 
nor  be  fond  of  one  that 
has  an  ill  name 

That  is,  one  that  saves  at 
the  spigot,  and  lets  it  run 
out  at  the  bung ;  also, 
penny  wise  and  pound 
foolish 

They  cannot  agree  together 

Self  doth  self  harm 

After  sweet  meat  comes 
sour  sauce 

A  honey  tongue,  a  heart  of 
gall 

To  beat  the  iron  whilst  it  is 
hot,  or  to  make  hay  whilst 
the  sun  shines 

He  who  kills  by  the  sword 
dies  by  the  sword 

He  who  is  loaded  with  iron 
is  loaded  with  fear  ;  that 
is,  he  who  loads  himself 
with  armour  and  weapons 
against  danger  discovers 
he  is  much  afraid 

He  that  makes  more  of  you 
than  he  is  wont  to  do, 
either  designs  to  cheat 
you,  or  stands  in  need  of 
you 

Do  not  trust,  nor  contend, 
nor  hire,  and  you  will 
live  among  men  ;  that  is, 
you'll  live  peaceably 


PROVERBS. 


365 


Se  nao  bebe  na  tdberna,  folga 

n'ella 
Achou  forma    para    o    sen 

sapato 

Nao  sejais  forneiro  se  tendes 
a  cabe$a  de  manteiga 


Ao  Iwmem  ousado  a  fortuna 

the  dd  a  mdo 
Roupa  de  francezes 

Cahir    da    frigideira    nas 

brasas 
Perto  vai  o  fumo  da  cJiama 

Quern   uma   vez   furta,  fid 
nunca 

Mai   vai  ao  fuso  quando  a 
barla  nao  anda  em  cima 


Cada  terra  com  sen  uso,  cada 

roca  com  sen  fuso 
Quantas  cabeqas  tantas  cara- 


We  say,  he  does  not  smoke, 
but  smokes 

He  has  found  a  last  to  his 
shoe  ;  that  is,  he  has  met 
with  his  match 

Do  not  undertake  to  be  a 
baker  if  your  head  is 
made  of  butter ;  that  is, 
do  not  take  upon  you  any 
business  you  are  unfit 
for 

Fortune  favours  the  bald 

Things  left  at  random,  or 
exposed  to  be  pillaged 

To  fall  out  of  the  frying- 
pan  into  the  fire 

We  say,  there  is  no  smoke 
without  some  fire 

He  who  once  steals,  is  never 
trusty ;  or,  once  a  thief, 
always  a  thief 

Alas  for  the  spindle  when 
the  beard  .is  not  over  it  1 
By  the  spindle  is  meant 
the  woman,  and  by  the 
beard  is  meant  the  man 

So  many  countries,  so  many 
customs 

Several  men,  several  minds 

We  say,  if  any  one  finds 
the  cap  fit  him,  let  him 
put  it  on 


366 


PROVERBS. 


Se  queres  saber  quern  e  o 
villdo,  metelhe  a  vara  na 
mdo 

Ndo  ha  rosa  sem  espinhos 


Quern  ndo  deve,  ndo  teme 
Quando    pode,    ndo    quer  ; 

quando  quer,  ndo  pode 
Homem     honrado     ndo    ha 

mister  gabado 
Homem  grande,  besta  de  pdo 


Debaixo  de  md  capajaz  bom 
bebedor 


Quern  muito   abraqa,  pouco 

aperta 
No  aqougue,  quern  mal  falla, 

mal  ouve 


Quern   em   mais  alto   nada, 
mais  prestes  se  qfoga 

Hospedaformosa,  damnofaz 
d  bolsa 


Set  a  beggar  on  horseback, 
and  he  will  ride  to  the 
death 

There  is  no  rose  without 
thorns,  there  is  no  sweet 
without  some  pain 

Out  of  debt,  out  of  danger 

It  is  good  to  make  hay 
while  the  sun  shines 

We  say,  a  good  face  needs 
no  recommendation 

This  proverb  intimates 
that  things  are  not  to  be 
valued  by  their  bulk,  but 
according  to  their  in- 
trinsic worth  and  value ; 
and  so  we  say,  a  lark  is 
better  than  a  kite 

A  tattered  cloak  may  cover 
a  good  drinker ;  that  is, 
men  are  not  to  be  judged 
by  outward  appearance 

All  grasp,  all  lose  ;  or  covet 
all,  and  lose  all. 

He  that  speaks  knavishly 
shall  hear  knavishly. 
Terence  says,  Qui  pergit 
ea  quce  vult  dicere,  ea  quce 
non  vult  audiet 

That  is,  the  highest  charges 
are  the  more  liable  and 
nearer  to  the  downfall 

A  beautiful  hostess,  or  land- 
lady, is  bad  for  the  purse 


PROVERBS. 


367 


O  hospede  e  o  peixe  aos  tres 
dias  fede 

Horta  sem  agoa,  casa  sem 
telhado,  mul/ter  sem  amor, 
marido  sem  cuidado,  de 
graqa  e  caro 


Hour  a  ao  bom  para  que  te 
honre,  e  ao  mdo  para  que 
te  ndo  deshonre 

Honra  e  dos  amos,  a  que 
se  faz  aos  criados 

Officio  de  camellia,  honra 
sem  proveito 


Ilomem      apercebido,     meio 
combatido 


Fresh  fish,  and  new-come 
guests,  smell  when  they 
are  three  days  old 

That  is,  a  garden  without 
water,  a  house  untiled,  a 
wife  without  love,  and  a 
husband  without  trou- 
bles, are  all  alike,  being 
all  worth  nought 

Honour  a  good  man,  that 
he  may  honour  you ;  and 
a  bad  man,  that  he  may 
not  dishonour  you 

The  honour  done  to  ser- 
vants redounds  to  their 
masters 

An  office  in  the  council  is 
honour  without  profit ; 
that  is,  to  be  of  the 
council  of  a  town,  by 
which  nothing  is  got  in 
Portugal 

A  man  that  is  prepared  has 
half  the  battle  over 


368 


FAMILIAR  DIALOGUES. 


Muito  bons  dias  senhor  Good  day,  sir 

Como   estd    vmce  ?    or   como     How  do  you  do,  sir  ? 


Very  well,  at  your  service 

At  your  service 

I  am  obliged  to  you 

I  thank  you 

How  does  your  brother  do  ? 


Bern,    ndo   muito   bem,    vou     Well ;  not  very  well ;  so  so 

passando 

Muito  bem  para  o  servir 
As  suas  or  dens 
Fico-lhe  muito  obrigado 
Agradecido 
Como  estd  or  passa,  o  senhor 

sen  irmdo  ? 
Muito  bem,  ndo  muito  bem 


Elle  terd  gosto  de  ver  a  vmce 
Ndo  terei  tempo  para  ir  vel-o 

hoje 

Fac^a  favor  de  sentar-se 
Dd  uma  cadeira  ao  senhor 

Ndo  e  necessario 

Tenho  que  ir  a  fazer  uma  vi- 

sita  aqiii  na  visinhan^a 
Vmce  tern  pressa 
Eu  logo  voltarei 


He  is  very  well  ;  not  very 

well 

He  will  be  glad  to  see  you 
I  shall  have  no  time  to  sec 

him  to  day 

Be  pleased  to  sit  down 
Give  a  chair  to  the  gentle- 

man 

There  is  no  occasion 
I  must  go  to  make  a  visit 

in  the  neighbourhood 
You  are  in  haste 
I   will  be   back    or   return 

presently 


DIALOGUES. 


369 


Adeus  men  senkor 

F6lgo  de  o  ver  com  boa  saude 

Beijo  as  mdos  de  vm^ 
Sou  sen  criado 


Farewell,  sir 

I  am  glad  to  see    you  in 

good  health 
I  kiss  your  hand 
I  am  your  servant 


PARA  FAZER  UMA  VISITA  DE 
MANHA. 

Onde  estd  ten  amo? 
Ainda  dor  me  ? 
Ndo  senhor,  die  estd  acordado 
Estd  elle  jd  levantado  ? 
Ndo,  senhor,  elle  ainda  estd 

na  cama 
Que  vergonha  de  estar  ainda 

na  cama  a  estas  horas  ! 

Hontem  d  noite  fui  para  a 
cama  too  tarde,  que  ndo 
me  pude  levantar  cedo  esta 
manhd 

Que  fizerdo  vmeei  depois  de 
ceiar  ? 

Danpdmos,  cantdmos,  rimos, 
e  jogdmos 

A  que  jogo  ? 

Aos  centos 

Quanto  me  peza  de  o  ndo  ter 
sabido  ! 

Quern  ganhou?  quem  perdeo? 

Eu  ganhei  dez  moedas 

Ate  que  horasjogardo  vm™'? 


TO    VISIT    IN    THE   MORNING. 


Where  is  your  master? 
Is  he  asleep  still  ? 
No,  sir,  he  is  awake 
Is  he  up  ? 
No,  sir,  he  is  still  in  bed 

What  a  shame  it  is  to  be  in 
bed  at  this  hour  of  the 
day! 

I  went  to  bed  so  late  last 
night,  I  could  not  rise 
early  this  morning 

What    did    you    do    after 

supper  1 
We   danced,   we   sang,  \\c 

laughed,  we  played 
At  what  game  ? 
We  played  at  piquet 
How  grieved  I  am,  I  did  not 

know  it 

Who  won]  who  lost? 
I  won  ten  moidores 
Till  what  hour  did  you  play? 
BB 


370 


DIALOGUES. 


Ate    duas   horas   depots  da  Till  two  in  the  morning 

meia  noite 

A  que  horas  foi  vmce  para  a  At  what  o'clock  did  you  go 

cama  ?  to  bed? 

As  tres,  as  tres  horas  e  meia  At  three,  at  half-past  three 

Que  horas  sdo  ?  What's  o'clock  ? 

Que   horas    the  parece    que  What  do  you  think  it  is? 

sejao  ? 

Parece-me  que  SOLO  apenas  oito  Scarcely  eight,  I  believe 

horas 

Sim!  as  oito/  jd  derao  as  dez  How  !  eight !  it  has  struck 

ten 

Entdo  epreciso  que  me  levante  Then  I  must  get  up  with  all 

quantomaisdepressapuder  speed 


PARA   VESTIR-SE. 

Quern  estd  ahi  ? 
Que  quer  vmce  ? 
Despacha-te,  encende  o  lume, 

e  veste-me 

Dd-me  a  minha  camisa 
Eil-a  aqui,  senhor 
Ndo  estd  quente,  estd  muito 

fria 
Eu   a    aquentarei,    se    vmce 

quizer 
Ndo,  ndo  ;  traze-me  as  min- 

has  meias  de  seda 
Uma  d}  ellas  estd  rota 
Da-Ike  um  ponto,  concerta-a 
Dei-a  ao  que  as  concerta 
Fizeste  bem 


TO   DRESS    ONESELF. 

Who  is  there1? 

What  do  you  want 

Be  quick,  make  a  fire,  dress 

me 

Give  me  my  shirt 
Here  it  is,  sir 
It  is  not  warm,  it  is  quite 

cold 
If  you  please,  I  will  warm 

it 
No,  no ;  bring  me  my  silk 

stockings 

One  of  them  is  torn 
Stitch  it  a  little,  mend  it 
I  have  given  it  to  be  mended 
You  have  done  right 


DIALOGUES. 


371 


Onde   estdo   as   minhas  chi- 

nelas  ? 

Onde  estd  o  men  chambre  ? 
Pentea-me 
Dd-me  o  men  lenqo 
Eis  aqui  um  lavado 
Dd-me  o  que  estd  na  minha 

algibeira 
Dei-o  d  lavandeira 

Trouxe    ella   jd    a     minha 

roupa ? 

Sim,  senhor,  e  ndofalta  nada 
Quefato  quer  vmce  para  hoje  ? 

0  mesmo  de  hontem 

0  alfaiate  ha  de  trazer  logo 

o  seufato 
Batem  d  porta,  ve  Id  quern  e 

E  o  alfaiate 
Deixa-o  entrar 


Where  are  my  slippers  ? 

Where  is  my  dressing-gown 

Comb  my  hair 

Give  me  my  handkerchief 

Here  is  a  clean  one 

Give  me  that  which  is  in 
my  pocket 

I  gave  it  to  the  washer- 
woman 

Has  she  brought  my  linen1? 

Yes,  sir,  there  wants  nothing 
What  clothes  will  you  wear 

to-day  ? 

Those  I  wore  yesterday 
The  tailor  will  bring  your 

clothes  presently 
Somebody  knocks,  see  who 

it  is 

It  is  the  tailor 
Let  him  come  in 


O    SENHOR   E    O    ALFAIATE. 


Trazeis  o  men  fato  ? 

Sim,  senhor,  eil-o  aqui 

Ha   muito   tempo   que  estou 

esperando  por  elle 
Nao  pude  vir  ate  agora 
Nao  estava  acabado 
Ainda  ndo  estava  forrado 


THE    GENTLEMAN    AND    THE 
TAILOR. 

Do   you   bring  my  suit  of 

clothes  ? 

Yes,  sir,  here  it  is 
You  make  me  wait  a  great 

while 

I  could  not  come  sooner 
It  was  not  finished 
The  lining  was  not  sewed 


372 


DIALOGUES. 


Quer  vmce  vestir  a  casaca  para 

ver  se  Ike  estd  bem  ? 
Vejamos  se  estd  bemfeita 

Tenho  para  mini  que  Ike  ha 

de  agradar 

Parece-me  muito  comprida 
E    costume    agora   trazel-as 

compridas 
Abotoe-a 

E  muito  apertada 
Assim  deve  ser  para  que  ike 

esteja  bem  ao  corpo 
Nao  sdo  as  mangas  demasi- 

adamente  largas  ? 
Nao,  senhor,  estao-lhe  admir- 

avelmente 
0  colete  parece-me  um  pouco 

estreito 

Esta  e  a  moda  de  agora 
Este  vestido  estd-lhe  admira- 

velmente 
E   muito  curto,  muito  com- 

prido,  muito  grande,  muito 

pequeno 

Tendes  feito  a  vossa  conta? 
Nao,  senhor,  ndo  tive  tempo 
Trazei-a  dmanha,   e  pagar- 

vos-hei 


Will  you  please  to  try  the 

dress-coat  on  1 
Let  us  see  whether  it  is  well 

made 
I  believe  it  will  please  you 

It  seems  to  me  to  be  very  long 
They  wear  them  long  now 

Button  it 

It  is  too  tight 

To  fit  properly  it  ought  to 

be  tight 
Are  not  the  sleeves  too  wide  1 

No,  sir,  they  fit  very  well 

The  waistcoat  seems  rather 

narrow 

That  is  the  fashion  now 
This  suit  becomes  you  very 

well 
It  is  too  short,  too  long,  too 

large,  too  small 

Have  you  made  your  bill  ? 
No,  sir,  I  had  not  time 
Bring  it  to-morrow,  I    will 
pay  you 


PARA  ALMOCAR. 


TO  BREAKFAST. 


Traze-nos  alguma  cousa  2)ara     Bring    us     something    for 
almo^ar  breakfast 


DIALOGUES. 


373 


Sim,  senhor,  ha  linguiqas  e 

pastelinhos 

Gosta  vmce  de  presunto  ? 
Sim,  traze-o  ;  comeremos  uma 

talhada  tfelle 
Estendeum  guardanapo  sobre 

aquella  mesa 
Dd-nos  pratos,facas,  e  garfos 

Lava  os  copos 

Da  uma  cadeira  ao  senhor 

Assente-se  vm™,  assente-se  ao 

pe  do  lume 
Ndo  tenho  frio,  aqui  ficarei 

muito  bem 
Vejamos  se  o  vinho  e  bom 

Dd  cd  aquella  garrafa  com 

aquelle  copo 
Faca  favor  de  provar  aquelle 

vinho 
Como  Ihe  agrada?    que  diz 

vmce  d'elle? 

Nao  £  mao,  e*  muito  bom 
Eis  aqui  as  linguiqas,  tira 

aquelle  prato 
Gosta  de  lingui^as  ? 
Jd  comi  algumas,  ellas  sdo 

muito  boas 
Dd-me  de  beber 
A'  saude  de  vmce 
Dd  de  beber  ao  senhor 

Eu  bebi  ainda  agora 


Yes,  sir,  there  are  some 
sausages  and  patties 

Do  you  like  ham  1 

Yes,  bring  it,  we  will  eat  a 
slice  of  it 

Lay  a  napkin  on  that  table 

Give  us  plates,  knives,  and 

forks 

Hinse  the  glasses 
Reach  the  gentleman  a  chair 
Sit  down,  sir ;  sit  by  the  fire 

I  am   not  cold,  I  shall  be 

very  well  here 
Let  us  see  whether  the  wine 

is  good 
Give  me  that  bottle  and  a 

glass 
Taste  that  wine,  pray 

How  do  you  like  it?  what 
say  you  to  it  1 

It  is  not  bad,  it  is  very  good 

Here  are  the  sausages,  take 
away  that  plate 

Do  you  like  sausages,  sir  ? 

I  have  eaten  some,  they  are 
very  good 

Give  me  something  to  drink 

Your  health,  sir 

Give  the  gentleman  some- 
thing to  drink 

I  drank  but  just  now 


374 


DIALOGUES. 


Os  pastelinhos  erdo  bem  bons 
Estavdo     um    pouco     mais 

cozidos  que  devido  estar 
Vmce  mdo  come 
Tenho  comido  tanto,  que  ndo 

poderei  jantar 

Vmce  estd  zombaudo,  vmce  ndo 

tern  comido  nada 
Tenho  comido  com  muitogosto, 

tanto  das  ligui^as  como  do 

presunto 


The  patties  were  very  good 
They  were   baked   a   little 

too  much 
You  do  not  eat 
I  have  eaten  so  much  that 

I  shall  not  be  able  to  eat 

any  dinner 
You    only   jest,    you    have 

eaten  nothing  at  all 
I  have  eaten  very  heartily, 

both  of  sausages  and  the 

ham 


PARA  FALLAR  PORTUGUEZ. 

Como   vai   vmce   com   o   sen 

Portugue.z  ? 
E*td  vmcejd  muito  adiantado 

n'elle  ? 
Ainda  me  falta  muito;  ndo 

sei  quasi  nada 
Dizem  porem  que  vmce  o  folia 

muito  Item 
Prouvera  a  Deus  que  assim 

fosse  I 
Os  que  dizem  isso.  estdo  muito 

enganados 
Esteja   vmce  na   certeza   que 

assim  m6  disserdo 
Posso  foliar  algumas  pala- 

vras  que  aprendi  de  cor 

E  unicamente  o  que  e  neces- 
sario  para  come^ar  a  fallar 


TO    SPEAK    PORTUGUESE. 

How   much   progress   have 

you  made  in  Portuguese? 
Are  you  much  improved  in 

it  already  ? 
Far    from    it ;    I    scarcely 

know  anything 
It    is    said,    however,    you 

speak  it  very  well 
Would  to  God  it  were  true ! 

Those  that  say  so  are  much 

mistaken 
I  assure  you  I  was  told  so 

I  can  say  a  few  words 
which  I  have  learnt  by 
heart 

Only  so  much  as  is  neces- 
sary to  begin  to  speak 


DIALOGUES. 


375 


0  comeqar   ndo  e  bastante, 

e  preciso  que  vmce  acabe 
Vd  sempre  fallando,  ou  bem 

ou  mat 
Tenho    medo    de    commeter 

erros 
Ndo    tenha    vmce  medo;    a 

lingoa  Portugueza   ndo  e* 

difficil 
Conheqo  isso,  e  tambem  que 

ella  e  muito  engraqada 
Quefelicida.de  seria  a  minha 

se  eu  a  soubesse  bem  ! 
A  applica^do  e1  o  unico  meio 

para  aprendel-a 
Quanta  tempo   ha   que  vmce 

aprende  ? 

Apenas  ha  um  mez 
Como  se  chama  o  seu  mestre  ? 

Chama-se  - 

Ha  muito  tempo  que  o  conheqo 

Elle  tern  ensinado  a  muitos 

dos  meus  amigos 
Ndo  Ike  diz  elle  ser  preciso 

que  falle    sempre    Portu- 

guez? 
Sim,   senhor,  assim   me  diz 

muitas  vezes 
Pois,porque  ndo  f alia  vmce? 

Com  quern  quer  vmce  que  eu 
falle  ? 


The  beginning  is  not  all, 
you  must  make  an  end 

Be  always  speaking,  whe- 
ther well  or  ill 

I  am  afraid  to  commit 
blunders 

Never  fear,  the  Portuguese 
language  is  not  difficult 

I  know  it,  and  that  it  has 

abundance  of  graces 
How  happy  should  I  be  if 

I  were  master  of  it ! 
Application  is  the  only  way 

to  learn  it 
How  long   have   you   been 

learning  ? 

Scarcely  a  month  yet 
What     is     your     master's 

name  1 

His  name  is 

I  have  known  him  a  long 

time 
He     has     taught     several 

friends  of  mine 
Does  not  he  tell  you  that 

you  must  constantly  talk 

Portuguese  1 
Yes,  sir,  he  often  tells  me 

so 
Why    do     you     not     talk 

then? 
With     whom     would     you 

have  me  talk  1 


376 


DIALOGUES. 


Com   os   que  foliar  em   com  With  those  who  will   talk 

vmee  to  you 

Eu  quizera  fallar,  mais  nao  I  would  fain  talk,  but  dare 

me  atrevo  not 

E  preciso  que  vmce  nao  tenha  You   must    not   be    afraid, 

medo,  nem  se  peje  dos  que         you  must  be  bold 

o  ouvirem  fallar 


DO  TEMPO. 

Que  tempo  faz  ? 

0  tempo  estd  admiravel 

0  tempo  estd  mdo 

Fazfrio  ?  faz  color  1 

Nao  faz  frio,  nao  faz  calor 

Chove  ?  nao  chove  ? 

Nao  o  creio 

0  vento  estd  mudado 

Teremos  chuva 

Hoje  nao  ha  de  chover 

Chove,  chove  a  cantaros 

Estd  nevando 

Troveja 

Cahe  pedra 

Relampeja 

Faz  muito  calor 

Geou  a  noite  passada  ? 

Nao,  senhor,  mas  agora  estd 

geando 
Parece-me  que  ha  nevoeiro 

Vmce  nao  se  engana,  assim  e 


OF    THE    WEATHER. 

What  sort  of  weather  is  it'? 

It  is  splendid  weather 

It  is  bad  weather 

Is  it  cold  1  is  it  hot  ? 

It  is  not  cold,  it  is  not  hot 

Does  it  rain  1   does  it  not 

rain? 

I  do  not  believe  it 
The  wind  is  changed 
We  shall  have  rain 
It  will  not  rain  to-day 
It  rains,  it  pours 
It  snows 
It  thunders 
It  hails 
It  lightens 
It  is  very  hot 
Did  it  freeze  last  night  1 
No,  sir,  but  it  freezes  now 

It    appears    to    me    to    be 

foggy 
You   are   not   mistaken,   it 

is  so 


DIALOGUES. 


377 


Vmce  tern  um  a  grande  con- 
stipa^do  or  defluxo 

Ha  quinze  dias  que  o  tenho 

Que  horas  scio  ? 

E  cedo,  ndo  e  tarde 

E  tempo  de  almoqar  ? 

Poucofalta  para  serem  horas 
de  jantar 

Que  faremos  depois  de  jan- 
tar? 

Daremos  um  passeio,  or 
iremos  passear 

Vamos  dor  uma  volta 

Ndo  vamos  fora  com  este 
tempo 


You  have  caught  a  violent 

cold 

I  have  had  it  this  fortnight 
What  is  the  time  ? 
It  is  early,  it  is  not  late 
Is  it  breakfast-time  1 
It     will     be     dinner-time 

immediately 
What    shall    we    do    after 

dinner  1 
We  will  take  a  walk 

Let  us  take  a  turn  now 
We    must    not    go   abroad 
this  weather 


PARA  PERGUNTAR  QUE 
NOVAS  HA. 

0  que  ha  de  novo  ?   or  que 

novas  ha? 
Sdbe  vmce  alguma  cousa  de 

novo 
Ndo  tenho  ouvido  nada  de 

novo 
De  que  se  falla  pela  cidade  ? 

Ndo  se  falla  de  nada 

Ndo  tendes  ouvido  foliar  de 

guerra  ? 

Ndo  ou$o  foliar  nada  d'isso 
Porem  falla-se  de  um  cerco 


TO   INQUIRE   AFTER   NEWS. 

What  is  the  news  1 
Do  you  know  any  news 
I  have  heard  none 

What  is  the  talk  of  the 
town? 

There  is  no  talk  of  any- 
thing 

Have  you  heard  any  talk 
of  war  1 

I  have  heard  nothing  of  it 

There  is  a  talk,  however, 
of  a  siege 


378 


DIALOGUES. 


Fallou-se  d'isso,  mas  ndo  e 

verdade 
Antes  pelo  contrario  falla-se 

de  paz 

Assim  o  creio 
Que  se  diz  na  corte  ? 
Falla-se  de  uma  viagem 
Quando  vos  pare$e  que  el  rei 

partird  ? 
Ndo  se  sale.      Ndo   se  diz 

quando 
Onde,  or  para  onde,  se  diz 

que  elle  ird  ? 
Uns    dizem    que    ird    para 

Flandres,    e   outros  para 

Alemanha 
E  que  diz  a  Gazeta  ? 

Eu  ndo  a  li 

E  verdade  o  que   se  diz  do 

Sr. ? 

Pois  que  se  diz  d'elle  1 
Dizem  gue  estd  ferido  mor- 

talmente 
Muito  mepesaria  d'isso;  elle 

e  um  homem  de  bem 
Quern  o  ferio  ? 
Dois   marotos   que    o  inves- 

tirdo 
Sabe-se  o  porque  ? 

A  noticia  que  corre  e,  que 
deu  n'um  d'elles  um  bo- 
fetdo 


It  was  so  reported,  but  it  is 
not  true 

On  the  contrary,  there  is  a 
talk  of  peace 

I  believe  so 

What  say  they  at  court  1 

They  talk  of  a  voyage 

When  do  you  think  the 
king  will  set  out 

It  is  not  known.  They  do 
not  say  when 

Where  do  they  say  he  will 
go? 

Some  say  he  will  go  to 
Flanders,  others  to  Ger- 
many 

And  what  says  the  Ga- 
zette 1 

I  have  not  read  it 

Is  that  true  which  is  re- 
ported of  Mr. ? 

What  of  him? 

They  say  he  is  mortally 
wounded 

I  should  be  sorry  for  that, 
he  is  an  honest  man 

Who  wounded  him  ? 

Two  rogues  that  were  set 
upon  him 

Is  it  known  upon  what 
account  ? 

The  report  is,  that  he  gave 
one  of  them  a  slap  on 
the  face 


DIALOGUES. 


Eu  ndo  creio  isso.     Nem  eu 

tdo  pouco 
Comtudo,  cedo   saberemos  a 

verdade 


I  do  not  believe  it. 

either 
However,    we    shall 

know  the  truth 


379 
Nor  I 

soon 


PARA  ESCREVKR. 

Dai-me  uma  falha  de  papel, 
uma  penna,  e  uma  pouca 
de  tinta 

Ide  ao  men  quarto,  e  acka- 
reis  em  cima  da  mesa  tudo 
o  que  vos  for  preciso 

Ndo  ha  pennas 

Hagrande  quantidaded'ellas 
na  escrivaninha 

Ndo  prestdo  para  nada 

Ld  ha  outras 

Ndo  estdo  aparadas 

Onde  estd  o  vosso  canivete  ? 

Sabeis  vos  aparar  pennas  ? 

Eu  aparo-as  a  men  modo 

Esta  ndo  estd  md 

Em  quanto  acabo  esta  carta, 
fazei-me  o  favor  de  fazer 
um  ma$o  das  restantes 

Que  sello  quer  vmce  que  eu 

Vie  ponha  ? 
Sella-o  com  o  men  sinete,  or 

com  as  minas  armas 
Tern  vmce  posto  a  data  ? 
Parece-me     que     sim,     mas 

ainda  ndo  a  assignei 


TO  WRITE. 

Give  me  a  sheet  of  paper, 
a  pen,  and  a  little  ink 

Step  to  my  room,  you  will 
find  on  the  table  what- 
ever you  want 

There  are  no  pens 

There  are  a  great  many  in 
the  standish 

They  are  good  for  nothing 

There  are  some  others 

They  are  not  made 

Where  is  your  penknife  ? 

Can  you  make  pens  1 

I  make  them  my  own  way 

This  is  not  bad 

While  I  finish  this  letter, 
do  me  the  favour  to 
make  a  packet  of  the 
rest 

What  seal  will  you  have 
me  put  to  it? 

Seal  it  with  my  cypher,  or 
with  my  crest 

Have  you  put  the  date  ? 

I  believe  I  have,  but  I  have 
not  signed  it 


380 


DIALOGUES. 


A   quantos  estamos  hoje   do 

mez  ? 
A  oito,  a  dez,  a  quinze,  a  vinte 

Ponde  o  sobrescrito 

A  hi  estd  ou  sen  criado  ;  quer 

vmce  que  elle  leve  as  cartas 

ao  correio  ? 
Leva   as   minhas   cartas  ao 

correio,  e  ndo  te  esquecas 

de  pagar  o  porte 
Ndo  tenho  dinheiro 
Ahi  estd  uma  moeda  de  oiro 
Vai  depressa,  e  vem  logo 


What  day  of  the  month  is 
this? 

The  eighth,  the  tenth,  fif- 
teenth, twentieth 

Put  the  address 

There  is  your  servant ;  shall 
he  carry  the  letters  to 
the  post-office  ? 

Carry  my  letters  to  the 
post-office,  and  do  not 
forget  to  pay  postage 

I  have  no  money 

There  is  a  moidore 

Go  quickly,  and  return  at 
once 


PARA  COJJTRAR. 


TO  BUY. 


Que  quer  vmce? 

Quero  um   bom  panno  fino 

para  um  fato 
Tenha    vmce   a    bondade   de 

entrar,  e  verd  o  mais  bello 

panno  que  ha  em  Londres 
Deixe-me   ver  o  melhor  que 

vmce  tern 
Aqui  tern  vmce  um  excellente, 

que  agora  se  costuma  usar 

E  um  bom  panno,  mas  a  cor 

ndo  me  ograda 
Ahi  tern  vmce  outra  peca  que 

tern  a  cor  mais  clara 


What  do  you  want,  sir  ? 
I  want  a  good  fine  cloth  to 

make  me  a  suit  of  clothes 
Be  pleased  to  walk  in,  sir, 

you  will  see  the  finest  in 

London 
Show  me  the  best  you  have 

There  is  a  very   fine   one, 

which   is   much  worn  at 

present 
It  is  a  good  cloth,  but  I  do 

not  like  the  colour 
There    is    another    lighter 

piece 


DIALOGUES. 


381 


Agrada-me    a    cor,    mas    o 

panno   ndo    e  forte,    nao 

tern  corpo 
Veja   esta    pe$a ;    vmce   ndo 

achard  em  nenhuma  parte 

outra  tdo  loa  como  ella 
Quanta  pede  vmce  por  cada 

vara  ? 

0  sen  justo  prec.o  6 

Sr.  ndo  e'  meu  costume  por- 

me  a   regatear ;   fa$a-me 

favor  de  me  dizer  o  ultimo 

pre$o 
Jd  disse  a  vmce  que  aquelle  e 

o  seu  justo  pre$o 
E  muito   caro,    dar-lhe-hei 

a  vmce 

Ndo  posso  abater  um  vintem 
Vmce   ndo     deve    levar    esse 

prec^o 
Vmce   quiz    saber    o    ultimo 

pre$o,  e  eu  disse-lh6 

Hora, '  vamos,  cdrte  Id  duas 

varas  d'elle 
Asseguro-lhe  que  ndo  ganho 

nada  com  vmce 
Ahi   tern    cinco    moedas   de 

ourOj  de-me  a  demasia 
Tenha  a  bondade  de  me  dar 

outra    em    lugar    d'esta, 

porque  ndo  e  de  pezo 
Ahi  estd  outra 


I  like  that  colour  well,  but 

the  cloth   is  not  strong, 

it  is  too  thin 
Look    at    this    piece,    sir ; 

you  will  find  none  like  it 

anywhere  else 
What  do  you  ask  for  it  a 

yard1? 

It  is  fairly  worth 

Sir,  I  am  not  used  to  stand 

bargaining ;  pray  tell  me 

your  lowest  price 

I  have  told   you,  sir,  it  is 

worth  that 
It  is  too  dear,  I  will   give 

you- 

I  cannot  abate  a  farthing 
You  must  not  charge  that 

price 
You  asked  me  the   lowest 

price,    and    I   have   told 

you 
Well,  cut  off  two  yards  of  it 

I   assure   you   I   don't  get 

anything  by  you 
There    are    five    moidores ; 

give  me  the  change 
Be  pleased,  sir,   to  let  me 

have  another  for  this  ;  it 

wants  weight 
There's  another 


382 


DIALOGUES. 


PARA  UMA  JORNADA. 


Que  especie  de  caminho,  ha 

d'aqui  a ? 

A  estrada  e  bella,  boa 

E  soffrivel 

E  quasi  impracticavel  no  in- 

verno 
Agora  estd  coberta  de  lama 

por  causa  do  degelo 
Ndo  e  md  riesta  estaqdo 

Estava  coberta  d'agua  ainda 
ndo  ha  muito  tempo 

Estd  cheia  d'atoleiros 

E  larga  ou  estreita  a  estrada? 

E  espaqosa 

E  commoda 

Os  caminhos  ndo  sdo  mui 
bons 

Encontrdo-se  boas  estalagens 
na  estrada  ? 

Ha  boas  e  mas 

Sdo  so/riveis 

Em  geral  sdo  mui  mas 

Hd    pelo    caminho    cidades 

notaveis  ? 
Offerecem  ellas  alguma  cousa 

curiosa  ? 
Que  conduccao  posso  tomar 

d'aqui  a ? 

Pode   tomar   um   lugar   na 

diligencia 


FOR    A   JOURNEY. 


What  sort  of  a  road  is  it 
from  hence  to 1 

The  road  is  fine,  good 

It  is  tolerable 

It  is  almost  impassable  in 
winter 

It  is  all  over  mud  now, 
because  of  the  thaw 

It  is  pretty  good  in  this 
season 

It  was  overflowed  a  little 
while  ago 

It  is  very  boggy 

Is  the  road  broad  or  narrow? 

It  is  wide 

It  is  convenient 

The  roads  are  very  indif- 
ferent 

Are  there  any  good  inns 
upon  the  road  1 

There  are  some  good  and 
some  bad  ones 

They  are  tolerable 

They  are  generally  very  bad 

Are  there  any  remarkable 
towns  on  the  way  ? 

Is  there  anything  interest- 
ing in  them  ? 

What  conveyance  can  I 
have  to 1 

You  can  take  a  place  in  the 
stage  coach 


DIALOGUES. 


583 


Pode    ir   pelo    caminho   de 

ferro  ate 

Vd  pelo  bar co  de  vapor  ate 

a  

Pode  tomar  a  posta 
Passa-se  por  muitas  cidades? 

Ha  perigo  na  estrada  ? 

A  estrada  4  segura  ? 

JSim,   senhor ;    e  muito  fre- 

quentada 
Nao   ha   que    ter    medo   de 

ladroes 
Com  tudo,  sempre  sera  bom 

nao  atravessar  a  mata  de 

noite 
tiao  bem  servidas  as  postas  ? 

Pode-se  contar  com  cavallos 

de  muda  ? 
E  necessario   esperar  muito 

tfmpo  pelos  cavallos? 
•Quanto  se  paga  por  cavallo  ? 

Um  franco  e  meio  por  posta 
Quanto  se  da  aos  postilhoes  ? 


You  can  go  by  the  railroad 

as  far  as 

Go  by  the  steamboat  as  far 

as  — 

You  may  travel  post 
Do   we   go   through    many 

towns  1 
Is  there  any  danger  upon 

the  road? 
Is  the  road  safe? 
Yes,    sir ;     it    is    a    great 

thoroughfare 
There     is     no     danger    of 

robbers 
However,   you    had    better 

not  travel  in  the  forests 

by  night 
Are    the    post-houses    well 

provided  ? 
Can  we  depend  upon  having 

fresh  horses? 
Shall  we  have  to  wait  long 

for  horses? 
How  much  must  be  paid  for 

each  horse? 
One   franc   and   a  half  per 

post 
How  much  must  be  given 

to  the  postilions  ? 


384 


DIALOGUES. 


DA  CEA  E  DA  POUSADA. 

Com  que   afinal   temos  che- 

gado  d  estalagem 
Ajieemo-nos,  senhores 
Pega  nos  cavallos  d'estes 

senkores,  e  trata  d'elles 

Vejamos  agora  o  que  vmce 
nos  vai  da  para  ceiar 

Um  capdo,  meia  duzia  de 
pombos,  uma  salada,  seis 
codornizes,  e  uma  duzia 
de  calhandras 

Querem  mais  alguma  coisa  ? 

Isto    e    bastante  ;     dai  -  nos 

algum  vinko  que  seja  bom, 

e  uma  sobremesa 
Deixem  isso  por  min/ia  conta, 

eu  Ihesprometo  queficardo 

bem  servidos 
Alumia  aos  senkores 
Dai-nos  de  ceiar  o  mais  de- 

pressa  que  for  possivel 
Antes  que  vmces  tenkdo  descal- 

as  botas,  estard  a  cea  na 

mesa 
Tende   cuidado    que   tragao 

para  cima  as  nossas  malas 

e  pistolas 
Descalcai-me  as  botas,  e  de- 

pois  ireis  ver  se  tern  dado 

algum  feno  aos  cavallos 


OF  SUPPER  AXD  LODGING. 


So,  we  have  arrived  at  the 

inn 

Let's  alight,  gentlemen 
Take      these      gentlemen's 

horses  and   take  care  of 

them 
Now  let's   see   what   you'll 

give  us  for  supper 
A    capon,    half-a-dozen     of 

pigeons,     a      salad,     six 

quails,  and    a    dozen    of 

larks 
Will     you     have     nothing 

else? 
That's     enough ;     give     us 

some   good    wine   and   a 

dessert 
Let  me  alone,  I  will  please 

you,  I  warrant  you 

Light  the  gentlemen 

Let  us  have  our  supper  as 
soon  as  possible 

Before  you  have  pulled  your 
boots  off,  supper  shall  be 
on  the  table 

Let  our  portmanteaus  and 
pistols  be  carried  up- 
stairs 

Pull  off  my  boots,  and  then 
you  shall  go  to  see  whe- 
ther they  have  given  the 
horses  any  hay 


DIALOGUES. 


385 


Levai-os  ao  rio,  e  tende  cui- 
dado  que  Uies  dem  alguma 
avea 

Eu  terei  cuidado  de  tudo, 
estejdo  vmce*  descanqados 

Senhores,  a  cea  estdprompta, 

estd  no.  mesa 
Nos  vamosjd 
Vamos  cear,    senhores,  para 

nos  irmos  deitar  cedo 

Sentemo-nos,    senhores,    sen- 

temo-nos  d  mesa 
Dai-nos  de  beber 
A  sua  saude,  meus  seuhores 

E  bom  o  vinho  ? 

Nao  e  mao 

0  capao   nao  estd   bem   as- 

sado 
Dai-nos  algumas  laranjas,  e 

uma  pouca  de  pimenta 
P or  que  nao  come  vmce  d'estes 

pombos  ? 
Eu  ten  ho  comido  um  pombo, 

e  tres  calJiandras 
Dize  ao  estalajadeiro  que  Ike 

queremos  fa  liar 


Take  them  to  the  river,  and 
see  that  they  give  them 
some  oats 

I  will  take  care  of  every- 
thing, do  not  trouble 
yourself 

Gentlemen,  supper  is  ready, 
it  is  upon  the  table 

We  will  come  presently 

Let  us  go  to  supper,  gentle- 
men, that  we  may  go  to 
bed  in  good  time 

Let  us  sit  down,  gentlemen, 
let  us  sit  down  at  table 

Give  us  something  to  drink 

To  your  health,  gentlemen 

Is  the  wine  good  ? 

It  is  not  bad 

The    capon    is    not    done 

enough 
Give  us  some  oranges,  and 

a  little  pepper 
Why  do    you    not   eat  of 

these  pigeons  ? 
I  have  eaten  one  pigeon  and 

three  larks 
Tell  the  landlord  we  want 

to  speak  to  him 


DO  SALTAR  E  DO  CORRER. 


OF  LEAPING  AND  RUNNING. 


Horavamos,quervmeesaltar?     Come,    will     you    go    and 

leap? 

CO 


386 


DIALOGUES. 


Nao  e  bom  saltar  logo  des- 

pois  de  comer 
De  que  modo  de  saltar  gosta 

vmce  mais  ? 
O   mais    commum   e   a   pes 

juntos 

Quer  que  saltemosso  comumpe? 
Co  mo  quizdr 

Este  e  um  salto  muito  grande 
Quantos  pes  saltou  vmce  ? 

Mais  de  quatro 

Aposto   que   salto  por  cima 

d'aquelle  barranco 
Vmce  salta  com  um  pdo  com- 

prido 

Demos  uma  carreira 
Quer  vmce  que  corrdmos  a  pe 

ou  a  cavallo  ? 
De  lima  e  outra  sorte 
Comeqemos  a  correr  d'aqui 

Correremos  ate  cJiegar  a  esta 

arvore 
Tenho  corrido  trez  vezes  desde 

a  lugar  assignalado  ate  d 

arvore 
Vmce  nao  esperou  pdo  signal 

para  principiar  a  correr 
Aquelle  cavallo  correo  muito 

bem 
•Quantas   carreiras   tern   elle 

dado? 
Tres  ou  quatro 


It  is  not  good  to  jump  im- 
mediately after  dinner 

What  leaping  do  you  like 
best? 

The  most  usual  is  with  one 
foot  close  to  the  other 

Shall  we  hop  with  one  leg  ? 

As  you  please 

This  is  a  very  great  leap 

How  many  feet  have  you 
leaped  1 

More  than  four 

I  wager  I  leap  clearly  over 
that  ditch 

You  jump  with  a  long 
stick 

Let  us  run  races 

Shall  we  run  on  foot  or  on 
horseback  1 

Both  ways 

This  shall  be  the  starting- 
place 

This  tree  shall  be  the  goal 

I  have  run  three  times  from 

the  starting-place  to  the 

tree 
You  did  not    stay  for   the 

signal  to  start 
That  horse  has  run  his  race 

very  well 
How   many   heats   has    he 

run  1 
Three  or  four 


387 


CARTAS 

DE 

COMMERCIO. 


LETTERS 

ON 

BUSINESS. 


Londres,  30  de  Janeiro  de  1827. 
Senlior  F.  F. 

Recebi  as  suas  de  3  e  5 
do  passado,  no  dia  5  do  cor- 
rente,  vindas  pelo  navio  F. 
P.,  capitdo  B.  B. ;  pelas 
quaes  vcjo,  que  Vmce  pretende 
carreyar  as  fazendas  que 
recommendei  ao  sen  ciddado 
pela  minha  ultima,  no  pri- 
meiro  navio  para  esta. 

Inclusas  remetto  a  Vmce 
mais  alyumas  amostras;  po- 
rem  desejo  que  queira  recom- 
mendar  ao  tintureiro  que  as 
cores  sejao  vivas  e  firmes. 

Pelo  ultimo  navio  que 
(.Vaqui  partio  Ihe  remetti  a 
conta  de  venda  da  sua  partida 
-de  tneias  de  seda,  e  das  tres 
^caixas  de  chapeos,  pelo  navio 
A.;  e  ac/uindo  Vm"'  algu- 
mas  partidas  de 


The  30th  Jan.,  1827. 
Mr.  F.  F.,  London. 

Yours  of  the  3rd  and 
5th  of  last  month  came  to 
hand  on  the  5th  current 
by  the  ship  F.  P.,  Captain 
B.  B. ;  and  therein  I  take 
notice  that  you  intend  to 
put  on  board  the  next 
good  ship  bound  hither 
the  goods  I  recommended 
to  your  care  in  my  last- 
Herewith  I  send  you  more 
patterns ;  but  I  would  de- 
sire you  to  be  solicitous 
with  your  dyer  that  the 
colours  may  be  lively  and 
durable.  By  the  last  ship 
I  remitted  you  account  of 
sales  of  the  parcel  of  silk 
stockings,  and  the  three 
boxes  of  hats,  by  the  ship 
A. ;  and  if  you  meet  with  a 


388 


LETTERS. 


d'estes  dois  generos  que  Ihe 
agradem,  as  pode  mandar, 
pois  stio  agora  mui  procu- 
rados ;  deve  comtudo  ter 
muito  cuidado  em  que  sejao 
daidtima  moda.  Tenho  verifi- 
cado  o  ajuste  das  20  pipas  de 
azeite  daproxima  safra,para 
partirem  pelos  primeiros  na- 
vios:  igualmente  tenho  car- 
regado  no  navio  N.,  Capitdo 
F.,  as  suas  20  pipas  de  vinho 
tinto ;  assim  como  tambem 
as  doze  e  tres  quartos  de 
toanco,  cuja  factura  remetto 
inclusa :  os  conhedmentos 
Ih'os  remetterei  pelo  correio, 
Hei-de  estimar  chegue  tudo 
a  salvamento.  E  quantojjor 
agora  se  me  o/erece  a  dizer- 
Ihe  ;  no  entretanto  sou, 

de  Vmce 
m*°  Venerador  e  Criado, 


Senlior  Diogo  Jones. 

Vou    por   esta   avisar    a 

Vmce  que  pelo  nawo  Derby, 

Ihe,  remetti   duas   saquinhas 

de  diamantes,  importando  em 

pagodas  4396,   25  fan.,  10 


parcel  of  either  or  both  to 
your  mind,  please  to  send 
them,  such  articles  being 
now  in  demand  ;  but  great 
care  must  be  taken  of  the 
fashion  and  make.  I  have 
taken  care  to  secure  your 
twenty  pipes  of  oil  for 
the  first  ships  in  the  sea- 
son, and  put  on  board  the 
ship  N.,  Captain  F.,  your 
twenty  pipes  of  red,  and 
twelve  pipes  and  three 
quarter  casks  of  white 
wine,  of  which  the  invoice 
goes  herewith,  and  the 
bills  of  lading  shall  be 
sent  by  the  post,  and  I 
hope  will  come  safe  to 
hand ;  which  being  all 
that  is  necessary  at  pre- 
sent, 

T  remain,  Sir, 
Your  humble  servant, 
N. 


Mr.  James  Jones. 

Sir, 

These  will  advise  you, 
that  by  this  ship,  the 
Derby,  I  have  made  the 
return  of  your  stock  in  my 
hands,  viz. :  two  bulses  of 


LETTERS. 


389 


casks,  em  retorno  dos  sens 
fundos  em  men  poder ;  os 
quaes  ftz  registrar  nos  livros 
da  companhia,  em  conformi- 
dafa  com  as  suas  ordens. 

Inclusos  achard  o  conhe- 
cimenio,  factura,  e  a  sua 
conta  corrente  fechada,  que 
desejo  cheguem  a  salvamento, 
€  me  alegrarei  de  que  fa^a 
grandes  interesses. 

Como  eu  estou  para  voltar 
par    a    JEuropa,    d    minha 
chegada  a   Londres,    terei  a 
honra  de  o  ver,  e  Ike  darei 
tntdo  uma  rela$do  exacta  do 
commercio  da  India. 
Tenho  o  prazer  de  ser, 
Seu  humilde  Venerador, 

Forte  de  S.,  Jorge, 
!2deJan.,  1826. 


diamonds,  amounting  to 
pagodas  4396,  25  fan.,  10 
casks,  having  registered 
them  according  to  your 
order  in  the  company's 
books.  Enclosed  is  a  bill 
of  lading,  together  with  in- 
voice, and  your  account 
current  closed,  which  I  wish 
may  come  safe  to  you,  and 
turn  to  a  good  account.  As 
I  am  returning  to  Europe, 
on  my  arrival  in  London  I 
shall  have  the  honour  to 
see  you,  and  give  you  an 
exact  account  of  the  trade 
in  India. 

I  am,  Sir, 
Your  humble  servant, 

Fort  St.  George, 
Jan.  12,  1826. 


Lisbon,  4  de  Marqo  de  1825. 

£nr.  Jodo  Ferrier, 
Londres. 

Acho-me  favor ecido  com  a 
•sua  de  3  do  passado,  e  vejo, 
que  em  execwfio  das  minhas 
ordens,  tern  Vmce  comprado 
os  quinhentos  barris  de  aren- 
ques  de  tumo  a  III.  per  last. 


Lisbon,  March  4,  1825. 

Mr.  John  Ferrier, 

London. 
Sir, 

I  am  favoured  with  yours 
of  the  3rd  of  last  month, 
and  find,  in  compliance 
with  my  order,  you  have 
bought  the  five  hundred 
barrels  of  red  hen-ings  at 


390 


LETTERS. 


Estou  certo  de  que  esse  e  o 
menor  preco  par  que  Vmce  os 
poude  obter,  e  ndo  tenho  a 
meno  r  duvida  de  que  hdo  decor- 
responder  em  sua  qualidade. 

0  men  navio  se  estd  a 
aparelkar  para  os  ir  buscar, 
e  visto  elle  ndo  demandar 
mais  de  novo  pes  d'agua, 
poderd  mesmo  carregar  no 
sen  cdes  (como  Vmce  teve  a 
bondade  de  me  dizer),  o  que 
poupard  quatro  pence  por 
barril,  de  despesas.  Julgo 
que  elle  poderd  carregar  sete 
centos  barris,  ou  mais.  0 
capitdOj  visto  ndo  ter  des- 
pesas a  fazer,  ndo  necessi- 
tard  de  dinheiro. 

Agrade^o-lhe  muito  a  sua 
informaqdo  referente  ao  cam- 
bio  entre  Londres  e  esta 
praca,  mas  como  julgo  as 
Letras  sobre  o  Thesouro  um 
pouco  arriscadaSj  Vmce  se 
servird  sacar  sobre  mim  ao 
cambio  mais  vantajoso  pos- 
sivel,  jicando  na  certeza  de 
que  os  seus  saques  serao 
honrados  com  a  pontuali- 
dade  do  costume. 

Tenho  o  prazer  de  ser, 
De  Vmce 


£11  per  last.  I  make  no- 
doubt  but  that  was  the 
lowest  price  you  could  get 
them  for,  and  the  goodness 
of  them  corresponds.  My 
ship  is  getting  ready  with 
all  speed  to  go  down  to 
fetch  them,  and  she  may 
be  laden  at  your  quay,  as 
she  draws  no  more  than 
nine  feet  of  water  (as  you 
are  pleased  to  mention), 
which  will  save  the  charge 
of  fourpence  per  barrel ;  I 
judge  she  will  carry  seven 
hundred  barrels  or  more. 
The  captain  will  not  have 
occasion  for  any  money,  so 
will  want  no  supply.  I 
thank  you  for  the  informa- 
tion you  gave  me  in  relation- 
to  the  exchange  between 
London  and  this  place  ;  but 
as  I  look  upon  the  remit- 
tance of  the  money  hence 
as  hazardous  in  Exchequer 
bills,  you  will  be  pleased  to 
draw  on  me  at  the  most 
commodious  exchange  pos- 
sible, and  your  bills  at  the 
usual  course,  which  shall 
meet  with  all  due  honour 
from,  Sir, 

Your  humble  servant,, 


LETTERS. 


391 


Londres,  18  de  Mar<;o  de  1826. 

Silr.  J.  Morrice, 
Cadiz. 

Tenlio  recebido  em  seu  de- 
vido  tempo  as  suas  dijferentes 
cartas,  assim  como  tambem 
a  minha  conta  corrente,  a 
qual  tenho  lanqado  nos  meus 
livros  de  conformidade  com 
Vmee. 

A  sua  ultima  e1  de  29  do 
passado,  e  n'ella  me  manda 
o  recibo  das  tres  letras,  im- 
portando  em  seis  mil  pe$as 
de  oito,  que  men  irmdo  Joze 
Ihe  remetteupor  minJia  conta 
e  ordem  :  espero  fazer  triste 
negocio  com  ellas  depois  de 
urn  desembolso  de  tanto 
tempo,  e  com  um  cambio 
too  desfavoravel.  Acho  que 
os  limites  que  elle  Ihe  deu, 
forao  muito  abaixo  do  cam- 
bio,  e  preco  da  prata :  porem, 
visto  eu  ter  esperado  todo  este 
tempo,  e  nao  haver  probabili- 
dade  de  um  ou  outro  baixar, 
Vmce  se  servird  remetter-me 
o  meu  dinJieiro,  ao  cambio 
commute,  para  esta  pra$a,  ou 
Amsterdam,  como  Hie  parecer 


London,  March  18,  1826. 

Mr.  J.  Morrice, 

Cadiz. 
Sir, 

Your  several  letters  came 
to  hand  in  due  time,  as  did 
my  account  current,  which 
I  have  noted  in  conformity 
with  you.  Your  last  to  me 
was  of  the  29th  ult.,  where- 
in you  give  me  receipt  of 
the  three  bills,  amounting 
to  six  thousand  pieces  of 
eight,  which  my  brother 
Joseph  sent  to  you  for  my 
account  and  by  my  order. 
I  shall  make  but  a  sad  bar- 
gain of  them,  after  so  long 
a  disbursement ;  besides, 
they  cost  me  a  dear  ex- 
change. I  find  his  limits  to> 
you  were  much  under  the 
price  of  plate  and  exchange  -r 
now  since  I  have  waited  all 
this  time,  and  there  being 
no  probability  of  their  fall- 
ing, be  pleased  to  send  my 
money,  as  the  exchange 
comes,  either  for  this  place 
or  Amsterdam,  which  you 
judge  will  turn  most  to 
account.  If  the  plate  or 


392 


LETTERS. 


mais   conveniente    aos   meus 
inter  esses. 

Se  o  pre$o  da  cochonilha, 
ou  da  prata  descesse  tanto 
que  Vmet  julgasse  ser  mais 
conveniente  para  mim  empre- 
ga/r  o  men  dinheiro  em  qual- 
quer  d'estes  dois  generos,  do 
que  remetter-me  letras,  n'esse 
caso  o  poderdfazer,  deixando 
eu  isso  inteiramente  d  sua 
disposi$ao,  na  certeza  de  que 
tratard  dos  meus  interesses 
com  o  mesmo  disvelo  como  se 
Jossem  sens  proprios. 

Estimarei  saber  da  che- 
gada  do  comboio,  porque  po- 
deria  ser  produzisse  alguma 
mudanqa  favoravel  no  com- 
mercio,  e  que  cada  um  podesse 
Jazer  uso  dos  seus  capitaes  ; 
pois  ao  presente  as  circum- 
stancias  nao  conviddo  a  nada. 
E  quanto  por  agora  se  me 
offerece  a  dizer-lhe.  No  en- 
tretanto  tenJio  a  satisfacao 
de  ser. 

De  Vmce, 
m*0  attento  venor,  e  C°. 


cochineal  should  fall  to  a 
price  which  you  may  con- 
ceive will  answer  better 
than  by  remittance  at  a  due 
exchange,  in  such  case  in- 
vest my  money  in  either  of 
them :  this  I  shall  leave 
entirely  to  you,  being  per- 
suaded you  will  act  in  my 
affairs  as  if  they  were  your 
own.  I  should  be  glad  to 
hear  of  the  fleet's  arrival ; 
for  perhaps  it  might  give 
some  favourable  turn  to 
business,  so  that  one  could 
make  some  use  of  one's 
money,  for  at  present  it 
does  not  invite  one  to  any- 
thing :  which  is  all  from, 

Sir, 
Your  humble  servant. 


LETTERS. 


393 


Londres,  3  de  Abril  de  1826. 

Anr*  Mills  &  Cia 
Porto. 

Esta  serve  para  informar 
a  Vmce*  que  de  sexta  feira  a 
•oito  dias  se  hdo  de  abrir  os 
livros  do  Banco  de  Ing  la- 
terra,  para  pagar  os  divi- 
dendos  vencidos  ate  dquelle 
dia,  em  que  eu  ndo  deixarei 
de  receber  o  que  Ikes  per- 
tence  dos  juros  respectivos 
aid  esse  tempo,  em  virtude 
dos  poderes  que  me  confe- 
rirdo  para  esse  flm,  e  depois 
de  os  ter  recebido,  Wos  re- 
metterei. 

De  Vmces 
m*  atto  Venor.,  e  Criado, 


London,  3rd  of  April,  1826. 

Messieurs  Mills  &  Co. 
Oporto. 

This  may  serve  to  inform 
you  that  the  books  will  be 
opened  at  the  Bank  of 
England  on  Friday  se'nnight, 
to  pay  the  dividends  due  up 
to  this  time  to  the  parties 
concerned,  when  I  shall  be 
ready  to  receive  whatever 
belongs  to  you  both,  with 
the  respective  interests 
thereon,  by  virtue  of  your 
powers  given  to  me  for  that 
purpose,  and,  on  receipt 
thereof,  shall  remit  the  same 
to  you,  whom  God  preserve 
many  years. 

Your  most  humble 

servant. 


PART    IV. 

CONTAINING 

SEVERAL  USEFUL  AND  ENTERTAINING  PASSAGES,. 

COLLECTED    FROM    THE    BEST   PORTUGUESE    WRITERS. 

ENTRE  os  bons  ditos  de  Souzeni,  poeta  Persiano,  se- 
conta  que,  bebendo  com  outro  poeta,  seu  amigo,  certo 
licor,  se  queixava  de  que  era  muito  quente ;  e  dizendo- 
Ihe,  Amigo,  pobre  de  ti,  '  que  d'aqui  a  poucos  dias  te 
farao  beber  no  inferno  agoas  sulfureas  e  ardentes,  que- 
te  abrazarao  as  entranhas.' — c  Nao  importa,'  replicou. 
Souzeni :  '  bastara  que  me  lembre  algum  dos  teus  versos,, 
que  ellas  se  farao  mais  frias  que  a  neve.' 


Catharina  Parthenay,  sobrinha  da  celebre  Anna  Par- 
thenay,  deu  esta  bella  resposta  a  Henrique  IV.  '  Saiba 
V.  M.  que  eu  sou  muito  pobre  para  ser  sua  consorte ;  e 
que  ao  mesmo  tempo  descendo  de  uma  familia  muitO' 
illustre  para  ser  sua  dama.' 

Uma  Princeza  Catholica,  e  de  rara  virtude,  vendo- 
reduzido  o  Marechal  de  Saxonia  as  agonias  da  morte, 
disse,  que  era  para  sentir  o  nao  se  poder  rezar  um  De 
profundis  pela  alma  de  um  que  tinha  feito  cantar  tantos- 
Te  Deums. 


PROSE  EXTRACTS. 

A  Dom  Christovao  de  Moura,  Marquez  de  Castello 
Rodrigo,  e  Vice-Rei  de  Portugal  por  Dom  Philipe 
Terceiro,  indo  por  uma  sala  do  Pago  de  Lisboa  um 
soldado  honrado,  que  tinha  bem  servido  na  India,  Ihe 
•dava  um  memorial  e  pedia  que  se  lembrasse  dos  sens 
papeis,  porque  havia  largo  tempo  que  andava  preteii- 
-dendo,  respondeo-lhe  o  Marquez,  que  havia  muita  Gente 
para  despachar,  e  nao  se  podiao  despachar  todos  com 
brevidade.  0  soldado,  adiantando  o  passo,  se  atravessou 
diante  sem  descomposigao ;  e,  fazendo  parar  o  Vice-Rei, 
Ihe  disse  com  grande  confianga  :  '  Senhor  Dom  Christovao, 
•despache  V.  S.  os  homens,  e  deixe  a  Gente.'  0  Marquez 
-aceitou  o  memorial  e  o  despachou  no  mesmo  dia. 


Mandando  um  Fidalgo  em  Lisboa  abrir  em  uma  rua 
os  alicerces  para  se  fazerem  umas  casas,  sem  licenga  da 
•camara,  e  passando  por  alii  o  procurador  da  cidade,  poz 
pena  aos  officiaes,  que  nao  trabalhassem  na  obra  sem 
licenga  dos  Vereadores ;  e  os  officiaes  dizendo-o  ao  Fi- 
dalgo, mandoulhes  elle  que  nao  deixassem  de  trabalhar, 
e  que  nao  fizessem  caso  do  que  dizia  aquelle  villao  ruim. 
Tornando  o  procurador  da  cidade  por  alii,  e  achando  os 
officiaes  trabalhando,  mandou  que  dessem  com  elles  no 
-cepo ;  e  nao  faltando  quern  Ihe  contasse  o  que  o  Fidalgo 
disse"ra,  teve-o  em  olho  ;  e  no  tempo  que  elle  hia  atraves- 
sando  pelo  Rocio  para  sua  casa,  sahio-lhe  ao  caminho  a 
cavallo,  e  com  uma  langa  que  levava,  dando  na  sua 
sombra,  Ihe  disse  :  '  Porque  o  que  dissestes  foi  em  minha 
ausencia,  dou  em  vossa  sombra ;  se  m'o  tivesseis  dito  no 
rosto,  dera  na  vossa  pessoa.' 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  397 

Abou  Hanifah,  o  mais  celebre  doutor  dos  Mussul- 
manes,  tendo  recebido  uma  bofetada,  disse  ao  que  o  tinha 
insultado  :  *  Eu  poderia  vingar-me,  pagando-vos  na  mesma 
moeda ;  mas  nao  o  quero  fazer.  Poderia  accusar-vos  ao 
califa ;  mas  nao  quero  ser  accusador.  Poderia  nas  minhas 
oragoes  queixar-me  a  Deus  d'esta  affronta  ;  mas  nem  isso 
quero  fazer.  Por  fim,  poderia  pedir  a  Deus,  que  se  quer 
no  dia  do  juizo  vos  castigasse ;  porem  o  mesmo  Senhor 
me  livre  de  semelhante  pensamento ;  mas  antes,  se 
succedesse  que  n'este  instante  chegasse  aquelle  formidavel 
dia,  e  se  a  niinha  intercessao  tivesse  alguma  efficacia  para 
com  Deus,  nao  quizera  por  companheiro  senao  a  vos  para 
entrar  no  Paraiso.'  Que  admiravel  exemplo  para  os 
Christaos  aprenderem  a  perdoar  as  injurias  ! 


Da  Peregrinando. 

Passadas  que  se  dao  peregrinando,  sao  degraos  para  a 
casa  do  desengano.  Das  suas  fontes  sahem  os  rios  muito 
pequenos,  e  crescem  correndo,  e  levao  mares  ao  mar. 
Homens  que  da  sua  terra  nao  sahem  sao  navios  que- 
acabao  no  estaleiro.  A  sabedoria,  como  vinda  do  ceo, 
anda  n'este  globo  terrestre  peregrina ;  nao  e  facil  acha-la 
senao  peregrinando ;  errando  por  este  mundo,  se  aprende 
a  nao  cometter  erros.  Vapores,  que  na  terra  eram  lodo, 
apartados  d'ella  fazem-se  estrellas.  Aos  homens  que 
querem  luzir,  deve  a  patria  servir,  como  aos  planetas  o 
horizonte,  de  berQO,  para  ensaio  do  seu  luzimento ;  longe 
do  ponto  ortivo  e  remontados  a  mais  alta  regiao  apurao- 
as  influencias,  e  duplicao  as  luzes.  Que  nome  teriao 
hoje  no  mundo  Socrates,  Pithagoras,  e  Platao,  e  outros 
sabios  da  antiguidade,  se  a  modo  de  cepos,  ou  troncos, 
que  aonde  nascerao  fazem  raiz  e  no  seu  primeiro 


"398  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 

apodrecem,  nao  buscaram  fora  da  Patria  as  noticias  que 
ihes  faltavao.  Nao  se  ornara  Hercules  com  os  despojos 
dos  Monstros  que  domou,  se  os  nao  fora  buscar  pelo 
mundo ;  a  sua  dilatada  viagem.  devem  os  Argonautas  a 
conquista  do  vello  de  oiro.  Se  nao  correra  Ulysses 
remotos  climas,  fora  a  Ilha  de  Ithaca  de  toda  a  sua  gloria 
o  theatro.  Homens  perpetuamente  caseiros,  sao  gallos 
que  so  sabem  do  seu  poleiro.  Sabios  peregrines,  imitao 
no  seu  curso  as  fontes  que  passando  por  v6as  de  prata, 
ouro,  esmeraldas,  e  saffiras,  tomao,  e  comsigo  levao  a  flor 
de  suas  preciosas  qualidades.  Zombe  embora  Plutarco 
dos  que  louvao  a  peregrinagao,  e  diga,  que  se  parecem 
com  os  que  julgao  as  estrellas  errantes  mais  nobres,  e 
f  el  ices,  que  as  fixas.  Nao  ha  escola  mais  util  para  a 
vida,  que  as  muitas  vidas  ou  modos  de  viver,  que  na 
variedade  das  Nagoes  se  observam.  Veem-se  muitas 
cousas  nunca  vistas,  aprendem-se  muitas  que  se  nao 
sabiao,  faz-se  o  homem  capaz  de  toda  a  casta  de  negocios, 
-e  folga  de  ver  este  mundo  antes  de  sahir  d'elle.  Ate 
para  os  principes,  que  das  suas  cortes  fazem  na  terra  o 
,seu  paraiso,  bom  he  que  peregrinem,  para  conhecerem  o 
mundo,  que  elles  governao.  Os  commodos,  as  delicias, 
os  obsequies  dos  subditos,  podem  dar  o  conhecer  a  hum 
homem  que  iiasceu  soberano,  mas  com  este  conhecimento, 
nao  o  fazem  digno  da  soberania  :  se  nao  sahira  Alexandre 
•da  sua  Macedonia,  nao  passara  dos  lirnites  de  regulo,  e 
nao  chegara  a  avassallar  o  mundo. 


Do  Tempo  futuro. 

Trate  o  homem  do  presente,  e  nao  queira  penetrar  no 
futuro;  quern  de  tao  longe  poe  a  mira,  nao  pode  dar  no 
.alvo.  Muitas  vezes  bom  e"  ignorar  o  que  ha  de  succeder ; 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  399 

porque  se  for  bom,  a  dilagao,  6  tormento  ;  e  se  for  mao,  o 
trabalho  e  sem  proveito.  Para  futures  nao  ha  seguranga. 
Ao  Embaixador,  que  na  guerra  movida  por  Luiz  XL,  Key 
-cle  Franga,  a  Carlos  Duque  de  Borgonha,  procurava 
.attrahir  ao  Imperador  Frederico,  com  promessa  de  se 
repartirem  com  elle  os  despojos,  e  os  estados,  respondeo 
o  dito  Imperador  com  este  apologo :  '  Tres  cagadores 
•com  a  esperanga  de  apanharem  um  urso,  se  compromet- 
teriio  na  repartigao  d'elle.  Chegados  &  boca  da  cavenia, 
saliio  a  fera  com  tao  grande  impeto,  que  um  dos  cagadores 
botou  a  fugir,  outro  subio  a  uma  arvore,  e  o  outro  se 
estendeu  no  chao  fmgindo-se  morto;  chegou-se  o  urso 
.a  elle,  poz-lhe  o  fodnho  no  nariz,  e  nos  ouvidos,  e  nao 
Ihe  conhecendo  folego,  nem  signal  de  vida,  o  deixou  por 
morto.  0  que  estava  na  arvore  disse  ao  companheiro, 
Homem,  que  te  disse  o  urso,  quando  te  fallou  a  puridade, 
•com  o  focinho  nos  ouvidos  ? — Disse-me  que  era  mal  feito, 
dispor  da  pelle  e  carne  do  urso,  antes  de  o  verem  morto.' 
Com  isto  o  Imperador  deu  a  entender  ao  Embaixador, 
•que  era  precise  apanhar  primeiro  ao  Duque  de  Borgonha, 
•€  que  depois  se  trataria  da  repartigao  dos  sens  estados. 
Dos  successes  do  tempo  futuro  so  Deos  tern  certeza. 


Dos  Ricos. 

Em  lugares  estereis,  sem  hervas  nem  plantas,  produz 
;a  natureza  o  oiro,  para  mostrar  que  os  amadores  das 
riquezas  nao  tern  fe,  nem  honra.  Os  ricos  faoinorosos,  que 
.ainda  que  celebrados  nas  historias,  sao  o  opprobrio  da 
sua  posteridade,  poderao  ter  boa  fama,  se  Hies  nao  facili- 
tara  este  metal  a  execugao  de  seus  damnados  intentos. 
Em  todas  as  idades  forao  as  riquezas  antagonistas  da 
virtude  ;  ellas  inventaram  os  mais  enormes  delictos  ;  ellas 


400  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 

ensinaram  os  filhos  a  tirar  a  sens  pais  a  vida  ;  ensinarani 
os  poderosos  a  opprimir  os  innocentes,  arruinar  a& 
familias,  saquear  os  templos,  e  despir  os  altares ;  ellas 
induziram  os  amigos  a  que  faltassem  a  fe,  incitaram  os 
vassallos  a  negar  aos  principes  a  obediencia,  aos  libidi- 
nosos  derao  meios  para  violar  a  pudicicia  das  donzellas, 
e  estragar  a  honra  dos  maridos ;  finalmente  ellas,  ainda 
que  boas  para  a  vida  civil,  sao  causa  de  todos  os  males  ; 
e  posto  que  os  sabios  se  souberam  aproveitar  d'ellas,  a 
cubica,  e  o  mao  uso  das  mesmas,  encheram  o  mundo  todo 
de  criminosos.  Honiens  ricos  ordinariamente  se  perdem, 
por  terem  muito,  e  saberem  pouco  ;  desprezao  o  saber, 
porque  Ihes  parece,  que  para  todo  o  genero  de  vida  lhe& 
basta  o  ter.  A  Aristippo  perguntou  Dionysio,  porque 
razao  os  filosofos  frequentavao  as  casas  dos  ricos,  e  nao 
os  ricos  as  dos  filosofos.  Respondeo  Aristippo,  que  os 
filosofos  conhecem  o  que  Hies  falta,  e  os  ricos  ignorao  o 
de  que  necessitao.  Senhores  ricos,  e  filosofos  pobres, 
nao  podem  fazer  cousas  grandes,  porque  a  estes  Ihes 
falta  dinheiro,  e  aquelles  o  espirito.  Dizia  Diogenes,  que 
muitos  ricos  sao  como  as  plantas,  que  nascem  em  de- 
sertos  e  despenhadeiros,  porque  dos  frutos  que  ellas  dao 
nao  comem  os  homens,  mas  os  corvos,  milhafres,  e  feras  ; 
tambem  as  riquezas  de  muitos  nao  sao  para  sugeitos 
benemeritos,  mas  para  chocarreiros,  espadachins,  rufioes, 
e  meretrizes. 


Estado  da  Lusitania  ate  ao  tempo  em  que  foi  reduzida  a 
Provincia  Romana.  Por  A.  C.  do  Amaral.  Extra- 
hido  das  Memorias  da  Academia  de  Lisboa. 

Uma  historia  sincera  envergonha-se  da  gloria  va,  que 
se  busca  em  antiguidades  mentirosas :  degosta-se  d'esses- 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  401 

sonhos  agradaveis,  pasto  de  uma  esteril  recreagao;  e  se 
saborea  so  com  a  verdade  pura.  Tal  e  a  sorte  d'este 
escripto,  dirigido  a  fazer  prezentes  aos  Portugueses  os 
verdadeiros  costumes  e  Leis  de  seus  Maiores  :  rejeita 
tudo  quanto  a  impostura,  ou  a  credulidade  moderna  Ihe 
conta  dos  Seculos  que  a  Providencia  quiz  esconder-lhe  : 
e  se  contenta  com  as  escassas  memorias  que  pode  colher 
dos  raros  monumentos  antigos  que  Ihe  restao.  Nao  tenta 
entrar  pelas  espessas  trevas  dos  primeiros  36  Seculos  do 
mundo,  em  que  nao  acha  quern  o  encaminhe.  Pois  que 
os  Hebreos  unicos  guias  Seguros,  que  introduzem  em 
muitos  outros  paizes,  nem  um  so  passo  dao  para  estt* 
que  habitamos  ;  e  apenas  dao  motivo  a  conjectural*,  que 
das  Colonias  sahidas  do  Oriente  para  povoar  a  terrar 
algumas  se  estenderam  ate  a  esta  extremidade ;  mas  nem 
donde,  nem  quando  viessem  o  pode  colher  a  historia. 

Nao  acha  depois  dos  Hebreos  outros  de  quern  se  fie,, 
senao  os  Romanes :  e  ainda  estes  pouco  Ihe  sabem  dizer 
de  hum  Paiz  tao  apartado,  em  quanto  a  arnbigao  de  o 
scnhorear  os  nao  avizinha  a  elle  :  nial  conservao  uma 
obscura  tradigao  de  que  a  estas  partes  vierao  Celtas,. 
Iberos,  Persas,  Lusos,  e  Gregos ;  de  uns  apenas  ficara 
resto  na  derivagao  do  nome ;  de  outros  na  heranga  de 
alguns  costumes.  A  navega9ao  com  que  alguns  Povos 
do  fundo  do  Mediterraneo  comegao  a  enriquecer,  os  traz 
ate  estas  ultimas  Costas,  e  vai  logo  espalhar  pelo  Mundo 
a  fama  das  ricas  minas,  e  do  fertil  torrao  deste  Paiz 
desconhecido  ainda,  antes  que  da  qualidade  de  sens 
habitantes :  nao  tarda  comtudo  a  mostra  se  esta  ;  ccii- 
tinua  a  vir  em  busca  dos  thesouros  descobertos  a  ambi^ao 
estrangeira;  e  ve  erguer  d'aqui,  quaes  feras  acossadas* 
nos  seus  covis,  homens  bravos  para  defender  os  bens, 
que  a  Providencia  Ihes  destinara.  E  esta  he  a  primeira 
scena  que  se  nos  represeuta  no  Terreno  Lusitano ;  hum 

DD 


402  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 

Campo  de  Batalha,  continuada  ja  com  os  Fenicios,  ja 
com  os  Carthaginezes ;  que  depois  de  disputarem  por 
largo  tempo  com  estes  Barbaros  a  sorte  das  armas,  os 
deixao  ainda  por  domar  aos  Romanos  quando  Ihes  cedem 
a  conquista  do  Mundo.  Mas  ao  justo  motivo  da  defeza 
propria  succedem  depois  outros,  que  facilmente  poe  as 
armas  na  mao  a  Tins  hornens,  a  quern  a  falta  do  com- 
mercio  e  de  artes  quasi  nao  deixa  outro  meio  de  enri- 
quecer,  que  a  pilhagem ;  nome  com  que  muitas  das  suas 
guerras  sao  infamadas  pelos  Povos  mais  polidos  que 
elles.  E  o  mesmo  habito  de  peleijar  Ihes  vai  aliinentando 
um  natural  feroz,  que  ja  os  nao  deixa  accommodar  com 
o  socego  da  paz,  e  que  os  faz  buscar  inimigos  dentro  em 
casa,  quando  Ihes  faltao  os  de  fora. 

Estes  vicios,  e  virtudes  de  guerra,  he  o  que  de  prin- 
cipio  n'elles  distinguem  os  Romanos,  nao  os  vendo  senao 
armados  no  campo ;  e  de  que  nao  podem  deixar  de  dar 
testemunho  estes  mesmos  vaidosos  desprezadores  de  tudo 
o  que  nao  he  Romano.  Mas  em  fim  a  medida  que  se  Ihes 
chegao  mais  perto,  e  se  eiivolvem  com  elles,  ja  vao 
divisando  por  entre  alguns  claros  que  as  armas  deixao, 
a  forma  do  seu  governo  interior. 

Vem  que  este  Terreno,  que  designao  pelo  nome  de 
Lusitania,  e  habitado  de  Povos  differentes  independerites 
uiis  dos  outros,  e  governados  cada  um  por  suas  Leis,  e 
costumes  particulares ;  leis  raras,  e  costumes  singelos, 
ainda  com  a  marca  da  Natureza  nao  contrafeita. 

Como  a  seguranga  propria  e  quern  so  forma  estes 
corpos,  nao  largao  da  liberdade  que  receberam  da  natureza, 
mais  que  o  puramente  preciso  para  conservar  essa  mesma 
seguranga.  A  guerra  a  que  sao  dados  e  que  os  obriga  a 
•criar  um  Superior,  a  que  jurao  fidelidade ;  mas  conse- 
guida  a  paz,  expira  o  governo  do  General,  e  a  obediencia 
•dos  Soldados. 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  403 

Se  ha  que  estabelecer  de  novo  para  o  bem  commuin 
•da  Sociedade,  servem-se  do  meio  usado  das  puras  Demo- 
cracias,  Assembleas  geraes,  em  que  cada  pessoa  tern  o 
•arbitrio  de  approval*,  ou  rejeitar  o  que  se  propoe :  e  ainda 
n'esta  acgao  respira  o  ar  militar,  em  que  sao  criados ; 
um  bater  da  espada  no  broquel  he  o  signal  de  appro- 
vagao ;  um  sussurro  inquieto  o  de  desapprovar. 

A  simplicidade  da  Legislagao  segue  a  das  penas ;  sao 
os  reos  do  crime  capital  apedrejados,  e  para  que  o  horror 
do  crime  se  extenda  alem  ainda  do  castigo,  todo  o  que 
passa  depois  da  exeougao  he  obrigado  a  langar  alguma 
pedra  sobre  o  cadaver  do  justigado. 

Nao  desmente  da  parte  Legislativa,  a  do  Commercio 
interior  ainda  pouco  sujeito  a  fraudes  ;  nao  os  move  a 
•conlratar  a  sede  insaciavel  do  ouro,  que  mal  conhecem  : 
as  nmtuas  necessidades,  a  que  so  procurao  soccorrer,  os 
ensina  a  trocar  entre  si  as  cousas  precisas  a  vida.  Estas 
Ihes  dictao  tambem  o  que  devem  conceder  ao  corpo ; 
comeres,  e  bebidas  simples,  quaes  a  Natureza  as  pro- 
duzia :  vestidos  sem  mais  estudo  que  o  do  fim  para  que 
os  usao  ;  cama  sem  regalo,  nem  despeza ;  enfim  a  tudo 
o  preciso  para  o  conservagao  se  accode  com  o  menos 
-apparato  que  pode  ser. 

A  esta  sobriedade  bem  propria  de  si  para  dar  a  saude 
e  vigor  do  corpo,  ajuntao  o  trabalho  aturado  ;  os  homens 
o  da  guerra  quasi  continua,  e  nos  intervallos  d'ella  o  de 
exercicios  semelhantes  a  guerra  ;  as  mulheres  o  da  cultura 
dos  campos,  o  de  todo  o  trato  domestico,  que  com  discreta 
economia  Ihes  e  cedido  pelos  homens  occupados  com  as 
armas.  E  se  faz  memoria  dos  seus  bailes,  e  contares  nao 
sao  tanto  fructo  do  ocio,  como  do  innocente  prazer  da 
vida  social. 

D'este  modo  sobrio  e  trabalhado  de  vida  era  conse- 
•quencia  a  raridade  de  doengas  :  para  alguma,  que  acaso 


404  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 

haja,  n&o  he  venal  a  cura,  neni  o  remedio,  nao  se  tendo 
alguem  por  desobrigado  de  concorrer  para  um  officio  de 
rigorosa  humanidade  ;  he  o  enfermo  exposto  em  publico  ;, 
e  os  que  tern  sido  feridos  do  mesmo  inal  ensinao  os  remedios 
com  que  conseguirao  a  saude. 

Nos  que  habitavao  as  vizinhangas  do  Minho,  como 
erao  os  Gronios,  ou  Gravios,  os  Amphilocios,  e  outros,  se 
vem  assaz  retratados  os  costumes  de  Gregos,  de  quern  os 
Antigos  querem  que  elles  descendao ;  Jogos,  e  certames 
publicos,  cazamentos,  arte  de  augurar  tudo  he  de  Gregos. 
Idolatras  como  sens  Maiores,  nada  conservao  da  Religiao 
pura  que  a  Razao  Ihes  mostrara,  mais  que  o  reconheci- 
mento  de  que  ha  um  ente  maior  que  elles,  a  que  devem 
dar  culto  ;  porem  estragado  este  natural  sentimento  pela 
corrupgao  do  coragao,  imaginao  Divindades  indignas,  a 
que  honrao  com  um  culto  igualmente  indigno.  Se 
querem  dar-lhes  gramas  pelo  feliz  successo  de  uma 
batalha,  as  maos  direitas  dos  prisioneiros  sao  o  triste 
trofeo  que  Ihes  levantao.  Se  antes  de  qualquer  acgao 
procurao  saber  o  seu  bom  ou  mao  exito,  dentro  as  en- 
tranhas  de  um  iinmigo  e  que  vao  buscar  este  fatal 
segredo  :  se  querem  fazer  religioso  um  juramento,  e  pre- 
ciso  que  as  entranhas  quetites  de  um  homem,  e  de  um 
cavallo  Ihes  sirvao  de  banho,  em  que  depois  de  mettidas 
as  maos,  as  poe  sobre  o  altar,  junto  ao  qual  se  deve 
fazer  esta  ridicula  ceremonia.  Emfim,  e  sempre  sangue 
o  que  applaca  uns  Deoses,  que  estes  Idolatras  guerreiros 
formavao  4  sua  semelhanga. 

Estes  sao  os  poucos  vestigios,  e  quasi  apagados,  que 
se  encontram  dos  costumes  domesticos  dos  Lusitanos,  que 
de  ordinario  so  se  viao  no  campo  de  batalha,  detendo, 
ou  fazendo  retroceder  os  passos  aos  Conquistadores  do 
mundo.  Mai  o  podera  crer  quern  mede  a  forga  de  um 
Estado  pelo  fausto  de  seus  habitadores,  pela  magnifi- 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  405 

•cencia  de  suas  obras,  c  por  todo  o  esplendor  que  encanta 
os  sentidos ;  quern  nao  avalia  quanto  pode  um  Povo, 
em  que  todos  os  indtviduos  sao  aptos  para  a  defesa  da 
Patria,  em  que  a  tantos  Soldados  como  homens  en- 
durecidos  todos  no  trabalho,  e  todos  animados  do  amor 
da  liberdade. 

Um  povo  como  este  foi  o  que  sem  arte,  e  sem  dis- 
ciplina,  em  tendo  na  frente  urn  homem  que  o  soubesse 
mandar,  escarneceu  por  muitas  vezes  das  tropas  mais 
bein  reguladas,  e  deu  muitos  dias  de  magoa  e  de  deslustre 
-aos  soberbos  Romanos.  Viriato,  Sertorio,  e  ainda  outros 
•de  menos  nome  forao  instrumentos  da  gloria  Lusitana, 
•que  sobrepujando  a  emulaQao  ficou  eternizada  nos  escritos 
de  seus  mesmos  inimigos,  e  nos  marmores  que  o  tempo 
consumidor  nao  acabou  de  gastar. 

Por  mais  de  Seculo  e  meio  andarao  os  Romanos  na 
porfiada  lida  de  subjugar  este  ultimo  pedaQO  da  Hespanha 
que  j4  contao  toda  por  uma  po^ao  certa  dos  seus  do- 
minios  :  todos  os  annos  Ihe  nomeao  Governador ;  mas 
por  mais  que  tentem  mandar  Pretor  como  para  Provincia 
pacifica,  a  cada  passo  se  vem  obrigados  a  Ihe  mandar 
Consul  armado  ;  depois  de  terem  separado  o  seu  Governo 
do  de  quasi  todo  o  resto  da  Hespanha.  E  se  de  quando 
em  quando  algum  d'estes  Generaes  consegue  a  gloria  de  a 
pacificar,  e  sujeitar  as  Leis  Romanas,  pouco  tempo  Ihe 
dura  verde  o  louro  ;  na  sua  mesma  cabeQa  Ihe  mercha  ou 
ao  mais  tarde  na  de  seu  successor  ;  ate  que  a  longa  expe- 
riencia  os  desengana,  que  he  precise  mudar  de  system  a ; 
•e  que  so  costumando  primeiro  os  Lusitanos  a  se  sujeitar 
como  amigos,  he  que  os  poderao  insensivelmente  ir 
passando  a  obedecer  como  Vassalos. 


406  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 


Sobre   a    Poesia   BucoUca    dos   Poetas   Portuguezes. 

Joaquim  de  Foyos.     Extrahido  das  Memorias  de  Litte- 
ratura  da  Academia  de  Lisboa. 

Assim  como  entre  as  duas  especies  de  oragao,  por  que 
o  homem  tanto  excede  aos  outros  animaes,  se  cultivou 
primeiro  o  Verso,  assim  de  todas  as  sortes  de  Poesias 
parece  ter  sido  primeria  a  Bucolica.  Ainda  que  o- 
genero  humane  nao  nasceo  da  terra,  e  dos  duros  tronco* 
des  arvores,  como  imaginarao  nmitos  Poetas,  e  parece 
que  chegarao  a  crer  alguns  Filosofos  ;  com  tudo  depois 
do  diluvio,  espalhados  os  homens  por  toda  a  face  da 
terra,  e  perdidos  pouco  a  pouco  os  conhecimentos  que 
herdaram  de  sens  maiores,  e  so  conservavao  na  Sociedade,. 
he  summamente  provavel,  que  uma  grande  parte  d'elles 
viesse  successivamente  a  passar  por  estes  tres  generos  de 
vida :  Selvagem,  Pastoral,  Agricola.  Os  muitos  Povos, 
que  ainda  hoje  habitao,  e  se  achao  na  primeira,  e  segunda 
d'estas  vidas,  confirmao  a  verdade  d'esta  conjectura.  Mas 
o  homem,  vivendo  uma  vida  silvestre  nos  bosques,, 
separado  de  toda  a  Sociedade,  e  sustentando-se  unica- 
raente  de  caga,  e  dos  fructos  espontaneos  da  terra,  nem 
se  acha  em  circunstancias  de  adiantar  os  seus  conheci- 
mentos, nem  tem  tempo  para  cultival-os,  occupado,  e 
attento  todo  em  buscar  o  necessario  fysico,  que  nao  pode 
achar  sem  muita  difficuldade,  e  trabalho.  E  ainda  que 
acontega,  que  por  vezes  Ihe  sobre  algum  espago  livre 
d'estas  continuas  fadigas,  satisfeitos  todos  os  seus  iiaturaes 
desejos  e  appetites,  cancado  o  corpo,  e  entorpecidos  os 
membros,  Ihe  entorpecerao  juntamente  as  faculdades  da 
alma,  desacostumadas  a  discorrer  e  a  exercitar-se  em 
outros  objectos,  e  se  entregara  docemente  ao  somno. 
Nao  succedera  assim  aos  Pastores,  que  tendo  gado  que 
com  sen  leite  Ihes  subministre  o  sustento,  e  com  suas- 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  407 

pelles  o  vestido,  passarao  uma  boa  parte  da  sua  vida 
quietos  e  descangados,  sein  mais  outro  cuidado  que  o  de 
conduzir  e  defender  os  sens  rebauhos  e  manadas.  Obri- 
gados  de  necessidades  mutuas,  e  attrahidos  do  natural 
deleite  que  causa  a  companhia  dos  que  tern  as  mesmas 
precisoes  que  nos,  n'ellas  nos  podem  dar  algum  auxilio, 
e  recebel-o,  se  chegarao,  quando  o  permittir  a  abun- 
dancia,  dos  pastos,  uns  para  os  outros,  communicarao 
entre  si  os  sens  pensamentos,  e  desejos,  praticarao  sobre 
as  cousas  que  mais  amao,  celebrarao  a  sua  felicidade. 

Uma  vez  juntos  os  homens,  e  em  ocio,  contentes,  e 
sem  can9a9o,  impossivel  e",  que  nao  inventem  diversos 
jogos,  e  toda  a  sorte  de  desenfado  e  recreagao  para  evitar 
o  tedio  de  uma  vida  socegada  e  satisfeita.  Entre  estes 
divertimentos  nao  devia  ter  ultimo  lugar  a  Poesia.  As 
faculdades  do  homem  tern  uma  natural  disposigao  para 
ella ;  ou  a  Poesia  consista  na  imitagao,  como  querem 
Platao  e  Aristoteles,  ainda  que  clara  e  distinctamente 
nunca  nos  dissessem  o  que  esta  imitagao  seja ;  ou  em  uma 
oragao  levantada  sobre  as  expressoesvulgares,invertida  com 
figuras,  e  armonios  amente  modulade,  e  compassada  com 
o  metro  e  com  o  rhythmo.  Em  qualquer  d'estas  cousas  que 
fagamos  consistir  a  Poesia,  ou  em  todas  ellas,  para  todas 
recebeo  o  homem  da  Natureza  uma  admiravel  propensao. 

As  nossos  sensagoes  sao  nao  somente  a  origem  e  funda- 
mento  de  todas  as  nossas  ide"as,  mas  transformando-se  de 
diversos  modos,  sao  todos  os  nossos  juizos  e  raciocinios, 
as  nossas  artes,  as  nossas  Sciencias,  e  em  uma  palavra, 
tudo  quanto  sabemos  e  conhecemos.  Mas  a  imitagao  e" 
uma  sensagao  facil,  e  para  que  esta  disposta  a  con- 
formagao  dos  nossos  orgaos  e  das  nossas  potencias,  e  por 
consequencia  uma  sensagao  que  nos  achamos  por  extremo 
grata  e  deleitavel.  D'este  mesmo  principio  se  segue 
outro,  o  qual  aqui  igualmente  pertence,  e  vem  a  sei\ 


408  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 

que  e  natural  ao  homem  nao  so  a  oraQao,  e  a  harmonia, 
mas  tambem  essa  mesma  oragao  variada  com  differentes 
tropos  e  figuras  ;  isto  he,  com  diversos  modos  de  exprimir 
as  cousas,  e  os  pensamentos,  jd  com  a  mesma  harmonia, 
isto  e,  com  o  rhythmo,  e  j4  com  o  metro. 

Conhecer-se-ha  claramente  a  dependencia  que  estes 
dois  principios  tern  entre  si,  se  considerarmos  que  a 
imitagao  (a  qual  eu  jd  mostrei  ser  um  exercicio  sum- 
mamente  gostoso  ao  homem,  e  um  modo  facillimo  assim 
de  elle  apprender  como  de  communicar  aos  outros  os  sens 
sentimentos),  uma  vez  feita,  e  praticada  com  a  orac^ao, 
traz  necessariamente  comsigo  todas  aquellas  variedades 
da  mesma  ora^ao  que  apontei  acima.  D'aqui  vem  affir- 
marem  agudamente,  e  com  razao  justissima,  os  mais 
celebres  Filosofos  que  quizerao  descer  a  discussoes  d'este 
genero,  que  a  Poesia  era  tao  antiga  como  o  genero 
humano.  Certamente  parece  ter  nascido  logo  com  as 
primeiras  Sociedades,  que  elles  formarao,  e  quando  elles 
conservavao  ainda  muito,  assim  da  rusticidade  como 
da  singeleza  e  innocencia  natural.  Do  que  parece  ou 
claramente  provado,  ou  deduzido  com  assaz  probabilidade, 
que  a  Poesia  nasceo  e  se  inventou  entre  Pastores.  Mas 
em  que  genero  de  Poesia  se  exercitarao  estes  primeiros 
homens?  Nao  sera  difficil  conhecel-o,  se  reflectirmos  qual 
seria  a  materia  que,  segnndo  as  circunstancias  em  que  se 
achavao,  se  Ihes  offerecia  para  os  seus  cantos.  Aristoteles 
foi  de  parecer,  que  dos  primeiros  inventores  os  que 
tinhao  genio  elevado  imitavao  acgoes  illustres,  e  feitas 
por  personagens  grandes,  e  pelo  contrario  os  que  tinhao 
•engenho  mais  rasteiro  cantavao  as  acgoes  dos  homens  vis, 
«m  cujo  vituperio  compunhao  obras  ridiculas,  assim  como 
•os  outros  se  exercitavao  em  hymnos  e  encomios. 

Porem  este  erudito  e  intelligente  Filosofo  nao  falla, 
naquelle  lugar,  da  primeira  origem  da  Poesia  rigorosa- 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  409 

imente,  mas  sim  do  modo  com  que  ella,  depois  de  inven- 
tada,  se  foi  dividindo  em  diversas  especies;  porque  suppoe 
tempos  em  que  he  j&  graude  a  desigualdade  dos  homens  ; 
o  que  nao  tern  lugar  nas  primeiras  e  simplicissimas 
sociedades  de  Pastores. 

E  pois  summamente  verosimil,  que  estes  homens 
•quizessem  imitar  aquellas  cousas  que  com  mais  fre- 
quencia  se  otfereciao  aos  sens  sentidos,  que  satisfaziao  as 
suas  necessidades,  e  que  constituiao  a  bem  aventuran^a 
•da  sua  socegada  vida  e  felice  estado,  por  que  nellas 
•empregavao  toda  a  sua  atten^ao  e  cuidado.  Cantariao 
pois  os  seus  rebanhos,  os  montes  e  os  valles  em  que  os 
apascentavao,  os  rios  e  fontes,  a  que  os  levavao  a  beber ; 
a  alv*  e  serena  madrugada  que  os  chamava  ao  trabalho, 
a  sesta  que  os  convidava  ao  desca^o,  e  os  rafeiros  que 
Ihes  guardavao  o  gado.  Cantariao,  como  era  natural, 
as  paixoes  e  affectos  da  sua  alma ;  porem  nao  afFectos 
violentos,  e  desesperados,  que  nao  erao  proprios  daquelle 
vida,  mas  doces  e  suaves,  e  que  so  Ihes  causavao  aquella 
inquietacao  e  desasocego  a  que  se  nao  pudesse  seguir  fim 
-algum  funesto. 

Como  estes  argumentos  sao  todos  proprios  da  Poesia 
Bucolica,  segue-se  legitimamente,  que  ella  foi  a  prhneira 
-que  no  Mundo  inventaram  os  homens.  Sendo  pois  a 
Poesia  Pastoral  a  primeira  origem  de  toda  a  erudi9ao 
humana,  e  os  primeiros  esfo^os  que  fizerao  as  faculdades 
-do  homem  para  se  pulirem  e  cultivarem,  justamente  me 
persuadi,  que  a  Academia,  instituida  toda  para  utilidade 
publica,  e  que  alem  de  outros  mais  gloriosos  e  louvaveis 
cmpenhos,  tomou  a  si  o  de  dar  a  conhecer  os  principios 
•e  progresses  da  nossa  Litteratura,  havia  de  levar  em 
gosto  que  hum  Socio  sen  tratasse  dos  merecimeutos  dos 
nossos  Poetas  Bucolicos.  D'este  trabalho,  Senhores,  posto 
<jue  maior  que  minhas  fo^as,  me  quiz  encarregar,  por 


410  THOSE  EXTRACTS. 

ser  dos  mais  leves  e  faceis  que  tao  illustre  corpo  podia 
commetter  a  algum  de  sens  membros. 

Vos  tratareis  verdades  sublimes,  por  extreme  remotas 
e  escondidas  a  commum  comprehensao  dos  homens ;. 
medireis  o  espa9O  immense  dos  Ceos ;  poreis  Leis  aos 
corpos  mais  vastos,  mais  distantes,  e  ate  mais  rebeldes 
do  Universo ;  com  vossas  porfiadas  investigagoes  e  rara 
sagacidade  obrigareis  a  Natureza  a  que  vos  descubra  e 
patentee  aquilla  mesmo  que  ella  punha  maior  estudo 
em  occultar.  Assim  para  felicidade  dos  outros  homens 
augmentareis  aperfei9areis  os  sens  conhecimentos  ;  mas 
sereis  muito  particularmente  felices  vos,  e  feliz  a  Patria, 
em  cuja  utilidade  haveis  de  empregar  os  vossos  talentos 
e  todos  estes  trabalhos  e  fadigas  :  e  alia  vo-lo  saberu 
agradecer  com  o  premio  que  so  desejao  as  almas  grandes, 
do  louvor  e  da  gloria.  Eu,  gozando-me  e  comprazendo- 
me  do  vosso  alto  merecimento,  de  que  vos  quizestes  me 
coubesse  tambem  alguma  parte,  me  contentarei  com 
examinar  a  propriedade  e  elegancia  de  uma  palavra ;  a 
verdade,  novidade,  e  belleza  de  um  pensamento ;  a  hmo- 
cencia  e  sa  singeleza  de  um  Pegureiro  :  e  isto  prope  aquffi 
rivum,  on  quando  muito,  sub  ramis  arboris  altce. 

Mas,  tornando  ao  men  assumpto,  de  que  me  fizerao 
desviar  os  vossos  justos  louvores,  nao  sao  pouco  rele- 
vantes,  nem  concorrem  medianamente  para  a  instruc9ao 
e  cultura  dos  homens,  os  trabalhos  dos  Poetas.  Neg^l-o 
seria  nao  conhecer  o  modo  por  que  se  dilatao  e  fi]>or- 
fei9oao  as  nossas  faculdades,  e  ignorar  inteiramente  a 
Historia  dos  varios  progresses  do  entendimento  humano. 
A  restaura9ao  das  letras,  com  que  se  desterrou  a  igno- 
rancia  e  barbaridade,  a  que  nos  tinhao  reduzido  as  Nacoes 
do  Norte  e  as  contiiiuas  irrup9oes  dos  Sarracenos,  tern  as- 
suas  sementes  nos  Trovadores  Proven9aes  e  Lombardos, 
que  fructificando  felizmeiite  chegarao  a  produzir  os  dois 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  411 

abalisados  engenhos  de  Dante,  e  Petrarca.  Cultivada 
por  estes  dous  grandes  homens,  e  por  alguns  mais  seus 
contemporaneos  a  Lingua  Toscana,  preparou  a  Italia,  e  & 
sua  imitagao  a  toda  a  Europa,  para  um  conhecimento 
profundo  da  Lingua  Latina  e  da  Grega.  Com  taes 
disposigoes  e  auxilios  se  intruirao  as  Nagoes  Europeas 
nas  Artes  e  Sciencias,  e  em  toda  a  sorte  de  erudigao 
d'aquelles  sabios  Povos ;  e  inflammadas  cada  vez  m  ais  no 
desejo  de  saber,  tern  levado  muitas  das  Artes  e  Sciencias 
dos  antigos  a  um  ponto  incrivel  de  perfeigao,  &c. 


Analyse  e  Combinafies  filosoficas  sobre  a  Elocuc(ao  e  Estilo 
de  Sd  de  Miranda,  Ferreira,  Bernardes,  Caminka,  e 
Camoes.  Por  Francisco  Dias. 

Quando  entrei  n'esta  composigao,  julguei  que  devia 
tomar  um  ponto  fixo  donde  viesse  deduzindo  a  sua  ana- 
lyse, e  que  o  S&  de  Miranda  devia  indispensavelmente 
formar  a  epoca  donde,  segundo  a  ordem  do  tempo,  havia 
de  dimanar  todo  o  sen  progresso,  como  de  um  escritor 
que  langou  os  fundamentos  da  Poesia  Portugueza.  Mas 
antes  que  entrasse  n'esta  diligencia,  vi  que  me  era  de 
precisa  necessidade  fazer  uma  descripgao  exacta  do  estado 
em  que  se  achava  a  Lingua  quando  o  Poeta  Miranda  appa- 
receo,  e  sondar  as  qualidades  principaes  da  composigao 
e  estylo  daquelle  Padre  da  Poesia  Portugueza,  donde 
passou  para  Ferreira,  para  Bernardes-,  para  Caminha,  e 
ultimamente  para  Camoes,  o  maior  Poeta  da  Nagao,  e  o 
que  mais  enriqueceo  e  apurou  o  nosso  idioma;  discorrendo 
por  aquelles  pontos  que  mais  me  parecerao  dignos  de 
comparagao  no  genero  Sublime,  como  mais  nobre,  e  como 
aquelle  que  mais  esforgo  pede  da  fantasia  humana  ; 


412  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 

fazendo  juizo  de  cada  um  dos  Poetas  da  Analyse,  e  final- 
mente  indicando  as  origens  donde  nascerao  as  expressoes 
e  formulas  eombinadas ;  no  que  julgo  ter  satisfeito  ao 
Assumpto,  que  e  certameute  mais  difficultoso  do  que 
parece. 

Na  execugao  d'  este  tao  trabalhoso  argumento  me 
-conduzi,  segundo  as  luzes  que  pude  adquirir  na  ligao  de 
Aristoteles,  Cicero,  Longino,  Quintiliano,  e  muito  mais 
na  de  Locke,  Condillac,  Da  Marsais,  e  em  especial  na 
do  sobre  todos  sabio  Commeiitario  que  o  grande  Voltaire 
fez  as  Obras  de  Pedro  Corneille,  onde  se  vem  as  regras  do 
go&to  na  sua  maior  elevagao. 

Todas  estas  materias  sao  novas  em  Portugal,  e  por 
consequencia  nao  tive  a  quern  seguir;  e  apezar  dos 
-defeitos,  posso  dizer, 

que  aqui  vereis  presente 

Cousas  que  juntas  se  achdo. 

CAMOES,  Lus. 


Introduccdo. 

E  o  talento  da  palavra  a  mais  nobre  faculdade  do 
racional,  como  instrumento  com  que  nao  so  expoe 
as  suas  ideas,  mas  ate  pinta  os  mais  occultos  sentimentos 
do  espirito,  com  rasgos  tao  vivos  e  sublimes  que  os  faz 
passar  aos  coragoes  mais  izentos  de  interesse.  Aquella 
Filosofia  inata  ao  coragao  do  homem  que  preside  a  todas 
as  acgoes  que  mais  o  elovao,  foi  quern  formou  os  sinaes 
representatives  das  suas  ideas  simplices  e  compos tas,  e 
quern,  a  forga  de  infinitas  combinagoes,  Ihe  fez  conceber 
o  grande  pensamento  do  transumpto  mental  consignado 
nas  palavras  por  uma  successao  de  ideas  nao  interrom- 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  413- 

pidas,  cujo  nexo  const! tue  a  pintura  eterna  nao  so  do 
fysico,  mas,  o  que  e  mais  prodigioso,  do  moral  humano. 

Aquella  mesma  filosofia,  que  dirigindo  e  elevando  o 
espirito  humano  desde  as  ideas  simplices  ate  as  implexas 
Ihe  deu  as  primeiras  nogoes  da  expressao  simples  6  pri- 
mitiva,  como  mais  adaptada  as  necessidades  do  homem ; 
a  proporgao  que  Ihe  foi  ampliando  a  esfera  dos  seus  con- 
hecimentos,  Ihe  foi  ministrando  expressao  complexa,  isto 
e,  figurada,  com  a  qual  pinta  aos  olhos,  8  d&  corpo  e  vida 
as  niais  sublimes  abstracgoes  que  pode  conceber  o  entendi- 
mento  humano. 

D'este  immenso  aggregado  de  ide"as  simplices  e  com- 
pos tas,  como  consequencia  natural,  procedeo  a  vivacidade 
da  expressao,  e  a  riqueza  das  Linguas  que  se  elevaram 
ao  mais  distincto  grao  de  perfeigao,  segundo  o  numero 
de  acontecimentos  e  revolugoes  notaveis  :  e  muito  mais 
segundo  o  trato  frequente  com  as  nagoes  estranhas,  e 
communicagao  social  dos  povos  entre  si;  por  isso  mesmo 
que  das  grandes  crizes  precede  a  effervescenia  das  paixoes, 
que  pondo  em  movimento  e  actividade  a  massa  das  ideas, 
gera  novos  pensamentos,  e  nova  elocugao. 

D'aqui  se  infere,  que  os  melhores  de  todos  os  idiomas 
devem  forgosamente  ser  os  d'aquelles  povos  que  mais 
revolugoes  experimentaram,  e  que  melhor  conheceram,  as- 
leis  da  Sociedade.  Ve-se  pois  pelo  que  rios  ensina  a 
historia,  que  as  Nagoes  mais  pulidas  e  sabias,  tanto  na 
linguagem  como  nos  costumes,  forao  quasi  sempre  as  que, 
situadas  junto  ao  mar,  conheceram  mais  cedo  a  necessi- 
dade  de  communicagao  dos  povos  estranhos  por  meio  do 
Commercio  ;  ou  aquellas  cujos  acontecimentos  Ihes  derao 
lugar  distincto  nos  annaes  do  genero  humano. 

Por  isso  vemos,  que  as  Linguas  geraes  do  Malabar, 
Coromandel,  e  da  China,  regioes  maritimas,  assim  como 
tambem  a  Arabe,  sao  as  mais  bellas  e  autigas  de  todas- 


414  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 


as  Linguas  da  Asia.  Os  Povos  da  Grecia,  que  gozando  do 
mais  formoso  espectaculo  da  Natureza,  experimentarao 
tantas  e  tao  notaveis  revolugoes,  inventarao  o  mais  signifi- 
cativo  e  harmonico  de  todos  os  Idiomas,  onde  se  achao 
consignados  os  mais  insignes  monumentos  do  genio,  e 
donde  procedeo  a  niagestade  da  Lingua  dos  Romanes,  iiiio 
mais  famosos  pelas  suas  conquistas  que  pelos  escriptos 
immortaes  com  que  illustrarao  os  Seculos.  0  mesmo  se 
deve  considerar  dos  Italianos,  Francezes,  Hespanhoes,  e 
Inglezes,  cujos  Idiomas  tendo  origem  na  Lingua  Latina, 
se  tern  elevado  ao  mais  alto  ponto  de  perfeigao  possivel,  e 
nos  quaes  existem  monumentos  para  quern  todo  o  louvor 
he  diminuto. 

Mas  este  concurso  de  circunstancias  parece  que  ainda 
nao  foi  a  causa  sufficiente  da  perfeigao  das  Linguas : 
ainda  ali  se  diviza  hum  vacuo,  que  preciza  ser  occupado. 
Aqui  vem  a  Poesia,  com  toda  a  sua  pompa  e  magestade, 
gerando  novos  pensamentos,  pulindo  e  aperfeigoando  os 
Idiomas,  dando  a  tudo  alma  e  vida,  ja  elevando-se  aos 
maiores  assumptos  nos  louvores  do  Ente  Supremo,  e  no 
Panegyrico  dos  grandes  homens,  persuadindo  a  imitagao 
das  acgoes  nobres  e  dignas  dos  mais  distinctos  applauses. 
Ella  Ihe  abre  os  seus  thesouros,  ella  os  enriquece,  ella  Ihes 
dd  forga,  elegaiicia,  e  harmonia,  sem  o  que  seriao  uns 
cadaveres  seccos  e  inanimados.  Sem  a  Poesia  nada  seriao 
talvez  os  Gregos  e  os  Romanos,  que  tanto  encherao  o 
mundo  com  a  fama  das  suas  victorias,  com  a  grandeza  das 
suas  acgoes,  e  muito  mais  com  a  perfeigao,  com  que 
cultivarao  todas  as  artes  de  ge"nio,  de  que  tantos  e  tao 
admiraveis  testemunhos  nos  deixarao  principalmente  nos 
seus  escritos.  A  Poesia  pois,  que  teve  entre  os  antigos 
um  caracter  de  harmonia  muito  diverso  da  Poesia 
moderna,  veio  pella  ignorancia  dos  Seculos  a  tal 
decadencia,  que  pouco  faltou  par  near  inteiramente 
ignorada. 


PRObE  EXTRACTS.  415 

Das  reliquias  da  Lingua  Latina  e  Grega  se  formarao 
-os  Idiomas  modem os,  com  di versa  Syntaxe ;  e  com  elles 
resuscitarao,  ou  por  melhor  dizer,  formarao  os  Provengaes 
uma  Poesia  toda  nova  na  disposigao  das  cesuras  e  com- 
binagoes  harmonicas. 

Os  Italianos,  restauradores  de  quasi  todas  as  Artes, 
forao  os  primeiros  que  tratarao  a  Poesia  com  dignidade, 
aperfeigoando  os  metres  e  harmonias,  que  os  mesmos 
Provei^aes  e  Sicilianos  tinhao  inventado ;  e  tanto  se 
-applicarao  a  ella,  que  ja  no  decimo  quarto  Seculo  era 
famoso  Poeta  o  celebre  Dante,  quern  fixou  todas  as 
.accentuagoes  harmonicas  do  hendecasyllabo,  que  ficou 
sen  do  o  mais  necessario  metro  da  Poesia  Italiana,  Cas- 
telhana,  e  Portugueza. 

Entraram  os  Mouros  em  Hespanha,  e  com  elles  a 
Poesia  :  porem  o  desasocego  da  guerra  nao  deu  lugar  aos 
antigos  possuidores  d'esta  Kegiao,  tao  infestada  de  Nagoes 
-estranhas,  a  cultivar  a  Poesia  seriamente,  nem  a  pulir  os 
seus  Idiomas  tao  cedo  como  os  Italianos.  Da  longa 
•dominagao  que  os  Romanes  tiverao  em  Hespanha  se  havia 
nella  introduzido  o  uzo  da  Lingua  Latina,  que  veio  a  ser 
vulgar :  d'ella,  e  de  varies  dialectos  barburos,  se  formarao 
os  dois  mais  bellos,  e  soiioros  Idiomas  de  Hespanha,  e 
talves  da  Europa,  o  Castelhano,  e  o  Portuguez. 

Estas  duas  Linguas  se  forao  igualmente  aperfeigoando, 
<le  sorte  que  a  um  mesmo  tempo  chegaram  ao  seu  auge. 
Com  tudo,  sendo  a  Nagao  Portugueza  mais  moderna,  e 
occupando  muito  menos  espago  de  torreno  que  a  Castel- 
hana,  veio  mais  cedo  a  produzir  monumentos  que  assaz 
distinguiram  e  acreditaram  o  seu  Idioma.  As  historias 
de  Joao  de  Barros  dadas  a  luz  no  meio  do  Seculo  decimo 
sexto,  e  traduzidas  em  todas  as  Linguas  cultas  da  Europa, 
fizerao  inostrar  ao  Mundo  litterario,  que  a  Lingua  Portu- 
gueza era  a  mais  filha  da  Latina.  Um  numero  sufficiente 


416  PROSE  EXTRACTS. 

de  Escriptores,  que  logo  depois  vierao,  acabarao  de  deto 
minar  o  genio  da  Lingua,  cujo  caracter  he  elegancia  a 
perspicuidade.  Sendo  pois  a  Lingua  Portugueza  desde  a 
sua  origem  mui  doce  e  sonora,  resultado  natural  da 
quantidade  proporcionada  das  suas  vogaes  e  consoantes, 
das  quaes  as  primeiras  nao  sao  tao  frequent es  e  conjunctas 
que  enfraquegao  a  harmonia,  e  a  fagao  languida  e  pouco 
notada,  como  se  ve  na  Lingua  Italiana;  nem  as  segundas 
com  nimia  frequencia  se  atropellao,  e  produzem  sons  rudes 
e  asperos,  como  nas  Linguas  do  Norte.  Todas  estas 
felices  disposigoes,  alem  do  genio,  convidavao  a  Nagao  a 
cultura  da  Poesia,  para  que  seinpre  teve  natural  in- 
clinagao.  Deixemos  a  miuda  investigagao  d'estas  causas, 
a  qual  sera  inais  propria  de  quern  tentar  escrever  a 
historia  da  Lingua.  Deixemos  tambem  as  Poesias 
anteriores  ao  Seculo  de  quinhentos,  muitas  das  quaes 
existem  em  algumas  Bibliothecas  antigas,  como  as  'd'  El 
Rei  D.  Diniz,  na  do  Convento  da  Ordem  de  Christo  etn 
Thomar,  e  outras  andao  empregadas  no  celebre  Can- 
cioneiro  de  Resende,  collecgao  preciosa,  donde  se  podem 
extrahir  as  maiores  luzes  a  respeito  da  Natureza  e  origem 
da  nossa  Poesia  :  e  comegando  a  tratar  do  auge  a  que 
esta  elevou  a  Lingua  Portugueza,  as  gramas  e  numero  que 
Ihe  communicou,  principiaremos  a  discorrer-de  uma  6poca 
mais  vizinha  a  nos,  e  esta  seja  determinada  pelo  famoso 
Sa  de  Miranda. 

Vejamos  pois  os  assumptos  que  este  Poeta  tratou,  a 
qualidade  de  sua  imitagao  em  geral,  o  uzo  que  fez  do 
hendecasyllabo,  ate  ao  seu  tempo  pouco  ou  nada  conhe- 
cido  em  Portugal,  a  em  toda  a  Hespanha ;  como  tratou, 
como  aperfeigoou  o  Soneto,  do  qual  se  deve  reputar  in- 
ventor entre  nos,  novas  gra9as  que  accrescentou  a  nossa 
Lingua,  e  como  finalmente  preparou  aos  Poetas  que  Ihe 


PROSE  EXTRACTS.  41? 

succcderam  hum  novo  caminho  para  sc  elevarcm  ate*  a 
immortal  Lusiada. 

Mas  antes  que  entremos  n'este  exame,  vejamos  prim- 
eiro  o  estado  em  que  o  S&  de  Miranda  achou  o  Idioma. 

A  Nagao  Portugueza,  que  ate  ao  lim  do  reinado  de 
D.  Fernando  jazia  na  ignorancia,  occupada  unicamente 
da  cultura  das  suas  terras  quanto  Ihe  era  preciso  para  o 
consumo  interior  do  Reino,  e  para  entreter  uma  ligeira 
sombra  de  commercio  exterior,  continuamente  vexado 
pella  tyrannia  Arabica,  que,  infestando  os  mares,  era 
eterno  obstaculo  a  navegagao ;  vivendo  como  desterrada 
na  solidao  dos  campos,  sem  communicagao,  nem  policia, 
fallava  uma  linguagem  informe  e  grosseira,  chea  de 
sons  rudes,  que  as  Linguas  barbaras  Ihe  tinhao  commu- 
nicado :  e  a  pezar  de  ter  uma  origem  tao  pura,  como  a 
Lingua  Latina  donde  procedia,  so  conservava  alguma 
energia  natural  nascida  das  significagoes  primitivas  das 
suas  vozes,  que,  alem,  de  serem  masculadas  de  infinitas 
anomalias  e  dissonancias,  erao  privadas  de  transudes, 
que  dao  forga  e  elevagao  aos  Idiomas.  Cheia  pois  de  con- 
strucgoes  erroneas,  de  diphtongos  asperos,  e  desinencias 
rudes,  pobre  de  termos,  sem  idea  do  nexo  que  subsiste 
nas  particulas,  sem  syntaxe,  sem  harmonia,  o  seu  periodo 
incerto  e  desunido  vicillara  sem  caracter. 

A  grande  revolugao  de  D.  Joao  L,  fazendo  a  mais 
viva  commogao  no  genio  dos  Portuguezes,  com  ella 
Ihe  vierao  novos  estimulos  de  gloria,  que  eleva  o 
espirito ;  novas  emprezas,  novos  pensamentos,  nova 
forga,  nova  energia  as  suas  enunciagoes  ;  novos  objectos 
do  discurso,  e  novo  linguagem.  Um  Latim  barbaro, 
at6  alii  organo  das  Leis  e  instumentos  publicos,  cessou 
de  ser  a  linguagem  do  Foro. 

Da  conquista  de  Ceuta  nasceo  a  idea,  a  grande  id&, 
dos  descubrimentos,  que  mostrando  a  necessidade  de-- 

EE 


418 


PROSE  EXTRACTS. 


cultivar  as  Mathematicas  e  a  Astronomia,  taes  quaes 
existiao  naquelles  tempos  obscures,  alargou  a  esfera  da 
Mechanica,  que  fazendo  novas  investigates  sobre  a 
acgao  dos  ventos,  e  resistencia  das  agoas,  extrahindo  a 
somma  da  combinagao  dos  movimentos,  resultantes  da 
acgao  e  reacgao  d'estes  dois  Elementos,  alcangou  mais 
perfeito  conhecimento  das  leis  dos  liquidos,  e  do  equili- 
brio,  e  aperfeicoou  finalmente  a  Arte  de  navegar.  Novos 
Astros,  novos  mares  e  costas,  'novas  ilhas,  novos  mundos 
-enchem  de  admiracao  todo  o  uni verso. 


419 


EXTEACTOS  POETICOS. 


From  the  Third  Canto  of  the  Lusiad  of  Camoes. 


ESTAVAS  linda  Inez  posta  em  sossego, 
De  teus  annos  colhendo  o  doce  fruto, 
Naquelle  engano  da  alma,  ledo  e  cego, 
Que  a  fortuna  nao  deixa  durar  muto  : 
Nos  saudosos  campos  do  Mondego, 
De  teus  formosos  olhos  nunco  enxuto 
Aos  montes  ensinando  e  as  ervinhas 
0  nome  que  no  peito  escrito  tinhas. 

Do  ten  principe  alii  te  respondiao 

As  lembrancas,  que  na  alma  Ihe  moravao, 
Que  sempre  ante  seus  olhos  de  traziao, 
Quando  dos  teus  formosos  se  apartavao : 
De  noite  em  doces  sonhos,  que  mentiao ; 
De  dia  em  pensamentos,  que  voavao  : 
E  quanto  em  fim  cuidava,  e  quanto  via, 
Erao  tudo  memorias  de  alegria. 

D'outras  bellas  senhoras  e  princezas, 
Os  dezejados  talamos  engeita, 
Que  tudo,  em  fim,  tu  puro  amor  desprezas, 
Quando  hum  gesto  suave  te  sugeita. 
Vendo  estas  namoradas  estranhezas, 
O  velho  pay  sesudo,  que  respeita 
O  murmiirar  do  povo  e  a  fantasia 
Do  filho,  que  casar-se  nao  queria  : 


420  POETICAL  EXTRACTS. 

Tirar  Inez  a  mundo  determina, 

Por  Ihe  tirar  o  filho,  que  tem  preso, 
Crendo  co'sangue  so  da  morte  inclina, 
Matar  do  firme  amor  o  fogo  aceso. 
Que  furor  consentio,  que  a  espada  fina,. 
Que  pode  sustentar  o  grande  peso 
Do  furor  Mauro,  fosse  levantada 
Contra  huma  fraca  darna  delicada1? 

Traziao-na  os  horrificos  algozes 
Ante  o  Key,  ja  movido  a  piedade, 
Mas  o  povo  com  falsas,  e  ferozes 
Razoes,  a  morte  crua  o  persuade. 
Ella  com  tristes  e  piedosas  vozes, 
Sahidas  so  de  magoa  e  saudade 
Do  seu  Principe  e  filhos  que  deixava, 
Que  mais  que  a  propria  morte  a  mogoava  ; 

Para  o  ceo  cristalino  levantando 
Com  lagriinas  os  olhos  piedosos, 
Os  olhos,  porque  as  maos  Ihe  estava  atando 
Hum  dos  duros  ministros  rigorosos  : 
E  depois  nos  meninos  atentando, 
Que  tao  queridos  tinha,  e  tao  mimosos, 
Cuja  orfandade  como  mai  temia, 
Para  o  avo  cruel  assim  dizia. 

Se  j&  nas  brutas  feras,  cuja  mente 
Natura  fez  cruel  de  nascimento, 
E  nas  aves  agrestes,  que  somente 
Nas  rapinas  aerias  tem  o  intento, 
Com  pequenas  crian^as  vio  a  gente 
Terem  tao  piedoso  sentimento, 
Como  coa  may  de  Nino  ja  mostrarao, 
E  cos  Irmaos  que  Roma  edificarao : 


POETICAL  EXTRACTS.  421 

0'  tu  que  tens  de  humano  o  gesto,  e  o  peito, 
Se  de  humano  he  matar  huma  donzella 
Fraca,  e  sem  for9a,  so  por  ter  sugeito 
0  cora9ao,  a  quern  soube  vencella, 
A  estas  criancinhas  tern  respeito 
Pois  o  nao  tens  a  morte  escura  della  : 
Mova-te  a  piedade  sua  e  minha, 
Pois  te  nao  move  a  culpa  que  nao  tinha. 

E  se  vencendo  a  Maura  resistencia 
A  morte  sabes  dar  com  fogo  e  ferro, 
Sabe  tambem  dar  vida  cem  clemencia 
A  quern  para  perdella  nao  fez  erro. 
Mas  se  to  assi  merece  esta  innocencia, 
Poe-me  em  perpetuo  e  misero  desterro, 
Na  Scythia  fria,  ou  la  na  Libia  ardente, 
Onde  em  lagrimas  viva  eternamente. 

Poe-me  onde  se  use  toda  a  feridade, 
Entre  leoens  e  tigres,  e  verei, 
Se  nelles  achar  posso  a  piedade, 
Que  entre  peitos  humanos  nao  achei ; 
Alii  co'  amor  intrinseco  e  vontade, 
Naquelle  por  quern  morro  criarei 
Estas  reliquias  suas,  que  aqui  viste, 
Que  refrigerio  sejao  da  mai  triste. 

'Queria  perdoar-lhe  o  Rey  benino, 
Movido  das  palavras,  que  o  magoao, 
Mas  o  pertinaz  povo,  e  seu  destino 
(Que  desta  sorte  o  quiz),  Ihe  nao  perdoao. 
Arrancao  das  espadas  de  aco  fino 
Os  que  por  bom  tal  feito  alii  preg6ao ; 
Contra  huma  dama,  6  peitos  carniceiros, 
Ferozes  vos  mostraes  e  cavalleiros  ? 


422  POETICAL  EXTRACTS. 

Qual  contra  a  linda  moga  Policena, 
Consolagao  extrema  da  may  velha, 
Porque  a  sombra  de  A  chiles  a  condena,. 
C'  o  ferro  o  duro  Pyrro  se  aparelha ; 
Mas  ella  os  olhos,  com  que  o  ar  serena,. 
(Bern  como  paciente,  e  mansa  ovelha) 
Na  misera  may  postos  que  endoudece, 
Ao  duro  sacrificio  se  offerece  . 

Taes  contra  Inez  os  brutos  matadores 
No  collo  de  alabastro,  que  sostinha 
As  obras  co  que  amor  matou  de  amores 
A'  quelle  que  depois  a  fez  rainha  : 
As  espadas  banhando,  e  as  brancas  flores 
Que  ella  dos  olhos  seus  regado  tinha, 
Se  incarnicavao  fervidos,  e  irosos, 
No  future  castigo  nao  cuidosos. 

Bern  puderas,  6  sol,  da  vista  destes, 
Teus  rayos  apartar  aquelle  dia, 
Como  da  seva  mesa  de  Thyestes 
Quando  os  filhos  por  mao  de  Atreu  comia  : 
Vos  6  concaves  valles  que  pudestes 
A  voz  extrema  ouvir  da  boca  fria, 
0  none  do  seu  Pedro,  que  Ihe  ouvistes, 
Por  muito  grande  espayo  repetistes. 

Assi  como  a  bonina,  que  cortada 
Antes  de  tempo  foi,  Candida  e  bella, 
Sendo  das  maos  lascivas  mal  tratada, 
Da  menina,  que  a  trouxe  na  capella, 
0  cheiro  traz  perdido,  e  a  cor  murchada,. 
Tal  esta  morta  a  pallida  donzella, 
Secas  do  rosto  as  rosas,  e  perdida 
A  branca  e  viva  cor,  co'  a  doce  vida. 


POETICAL  EXTRACTS. 


As  filhas  do  Mondego  a  mbrte  escura, 
Longo  tempo  chorando  memorarao, 
E  por  memoria  eterna  em  fonte  pura 
As  lagrimas  choradas  transform  arao  ; 
0  nome  Ihe  puzerso,  que  inda  dura, 
Dos  amores  de  Inez  que  alii  passarao  ; 
Vede,  que  fresca  fonte  rega  as  flores, 
Que  lagrimas  sao  agoa,  e  o  nome  amores. 


From  the  fifth  Canto  of  the  same. 

Porem  ja  cinco  soes  erao  passados, 
Que  dalli  nos  partiramos,  cortando 
Os  mares  nunoa  d'ontrem  navegados, 
Prosperamente  os  ventos  assoprando  ; 
Quando  huma  noite  estando  descui  dados,. 
Na  cortadora  proa  vigiando, 
Huma  nuvem  que  os  ares  escurece, 
Sobra  nossas  cabe£as  apparece. 

Tao  temerosa  vinha,  e  carregada, 

Que  poz  nos  cora^oens  hum  grande  medo,. 
Bramindo  o  negro  mar  de  longe  brada 
Como  se  desse  em  vao  n'algum  rochedo  ; 
0'  potestade,  disse,  sublimada, 
Que  ameago  divino,  ou  que  segredo, 
Este  clima,  e  este  mar  nos  apresenta, 
Que  mor  cousa  parece  que  tormenta  I 


424  POETICAL  EXTRACTS. 

Nao  acabava,  quando  huma  figura 
Se  nos  mostra  no  ar  robusta  e  valida, 
De  disforme  e  grandissima  estatura, 
0  rosto  carregado,  a  barba  esquallida, 
Os  olhos  encovados,  e  a  postura 
Medonha,  e  ma,  e  a  cor  terrena  e  pallida, 
A  boca  negra,  os  dentes  amarellos. 

Tao  grande  era  de  membros,  que  bem  posso 
Certificarte,  que  este  era  o  segundo 
De  Rhodes  estranhissimo  Colosso, 
Que  hum  dos  sete  milagres  foi  do  mimdo : 
Co'  hum  torn  de  voz  nos  falla  horrendo  e  grosso, 
Que  pareceo  sahir  do  mar  profundo, 
Arrepiaose  as  carnes,  e  o  cabello 
A  mi,  e  a  todos,  so  de  ouvillo  e  vello. 

E  disse  :  0'  gente  ousada  mais  que  quantas 
No  mundo  cometterao  grandes  cousas, 
Tu,  que  por  guerras  cruas  taes  e  tantas, 
E  por  trabalhos  vaos  nunca  repousas, 
Pois  os  vedados  terminos  quebrantas, 
E  navegar  meus  longos  mares  ousas, 
Que  eu  tanto  tempo  ha  que  guardo  e  tenho, 
Nunca  arados  de  estranho  ou  proprio  lenho  ; 

Pois  vens  ver  os  segredos  escondidos 
Da  natureza,  e  do  humido  elemento, 
A  nenhum  grande  hurnano  concedidos, 
De  nobre  ou  de  immortal  merecimento  ; 
Ouve  os  damnos  de  mi  que  apercebidos 
Estao  a  ten  sobejo  atrevimento, 
Por  todo  o  largo  mar,  e  pela  terra, 
Que  inda  has  de  subjugar  com  dura  gucrra. 


FOET1CAL  EXTRACTS.  425 

Sabc  que  quantas  naos  csta  viagem, 
Que  tu  fazes,  fizerern  de  atrevidas, 
Inimiga  terao  csta  paragem 
Com  ventos,  e  tormentas  desmedidas ; 
E  da  primeira  armada,  que  passagem 
Fizer  por  estas  ondas  insoffridas, 
Eu  farei  de  improvise  tal  castigo, 
Que  seja  mor  o  damno  que  o  perigo. 

Aqui  espero  tomar,  se  nao  me  engano, 
De  quern  me  descubrio  summa  vinganga ; 
E  nao  se  acabani  so  nisto  o  damno 
De  vossa  pertinace  confianya  : 
Antes  em  vossas  naos  vereis  cada  anno 
(Se  he  verdade  o  que  meu  juizo  alcai^a) 
Naufragios,  perdi£oes  de  toda  sorte, 
Que  o  menor  mal  de  todos  seja  a  morte. 

E  do  primeiro  illustre  que  a  ventura 
Com  fama  alta  fizer  tocar  os  Ceos 
Serei  eterna  e  nova  sepultura, 
Por  juizos  incognitos  de  Deos  : 
Aqui  por&  da  Turca  armada  dura 
Os  soberbos  e  prosperos  tropheos  ; 
Comigo  de  seus  darnnos  o  amea9a 
A  destruida  Quiloa,  com  Mombasa. 

Outro  tambem  vira  de  honrada  fama, 
Liberal,  Cavalleiro  e  namorado, 
E  comsigo  trara  formosa  Dama, 
Que  Amor  por  grao  merce  Ihe  tera  dado : 
Triste  ventura  e  negro  fado  os  chama 
Neste  terreno  meu,  que,  duro  e  irado, 
Os  deixard  de  hum  cru  naufragio  vivos, 
Para  verem  trabalhos  excessivos. 


426  POETICAL  EXTRACTS. 

Verao  naorrer  com  fome  os  filhos  caros, 
Em  tanto  amor  gerados  e  nascidos  ; 
Verao  os  Cafres  asperos  e  avaros 
Tirar  a  linda  Dama  os  sens  vestidos  : 
Os  crystallinos  membros  e  preclaros 
A'  calma,  ao  frio,  ao  ar  verao  despidos  ; 
Despois  de  ter  pizada  longamente 
C'  os  delicados  pes  a  area  ardente. 

E  verao  inais  olhos  que  escaparem 
De  tanto  mal,  de  tanta  desventura, 
Os  dous  amantes  miseros  ficarem 
Na  fervida  e  implacavel  espessura. 
Alii,  depois  que  as  pedras  abrandarem 
Com  lagrimas  de  dor,  e  rnagoa  pura, 
Abra9ados  as  almas  soltarao 
Da  formosa,  e  miserrima  prisao. 

Mais  hia  por  diante  o  monstro  horrendo, 
Dizendo  nossos  fados,  quando  a^ado 
Lhe  disse  eu  :  Quem  es  tu,  que  esse  estupendo* 
Corpo,  certo,  me  tern  maravilhado  ! 
A  boca,  e  os  olhos  negros  retorcendo, 
E  dando  hum  espantoso  e  grande  brado, 
Me  respondeo  com  voz  pesada  e  umara, 
Como  quern  da  pergunta  Ihe  pezara  : 

Eu  sou  aquelle  occulto  e  grande  Cabo 
A  quern  chamais  vos  outros  Tormentorio, 
Que  nunca  a  Ptholomeo,  Pomponio,  Estrabo, 
Plinio,  e  quantos  passarao,  fui  notorio  : 
Aqui  toda  a  Africana  costa  acabo 
Neste  meu  nunca  visto  Promontorio, 
Que  para  o  Polo  Antarctico  se  estende, 
A  quern  vossa  ousadia  tanto  offend  e. 


POETICAL  EXTRACTS.  42T 

Fui  dos  filhos  asperrimos  da  Terra, 
Qual  Encelado,  Egeo,  e  o  Ccntimano, 
Chamei-me  Adamastor,  e  fui  na  gnerra 
Contra  o  que  vibra  os  raios  de  Vulcano : 
Nao  que  puzesse  serra  sobre  serra, 
Mas  conquistando  as  ondas  do  Oceano 
Fui  Capitao  do  mar,  por  onde  andava 
A  armada  de  Neptuno,  que  eu  buscava. 

Amores  da  alta  Esposa  de  Peleo 

Me  fizeram  tomar  tamanha  empresa, 

Todas  as  Deosas  desprezei  do  Ceo 

So  por  amar  das  aguas  a  Princeza : 

Hum  dia  a  vi  co'  as  filhas  de  Nereo 

Sahir  nua  na  praia,  e  logo  presa 

A  vontade  senti  de  tal  maneira, 

Que  inda  nao  sinto  cousa  que  mais  queira. 

Como  fosse  impossivel  alcangalla, 
Pela  grandeza  fea  de  meu  gesto, 
Determine!  por  armas  de  tomalla, 
E  a  Doris  este  caso  manifesto  : 
De  medo  a  Deosa  entao  por  mi  Ihe  falla ; 
Mas  ella  co'  hum  formoso  riso  honesto 
Respondeo  :  Qual  serd  o  amor  bastante 
De  Nympha  que  sustente  o  d'  hum  Gigante  ? 

Com  tudo,  por  livrarmos  o  Oceano 

De  tanta  guerra,  eu  bnscarei  maneira, 
Com  que  com  minha  honra  escuse  o  damno 
Tal  resposta  me  torna  a  mensageira. 
Eu  quern  cahir  nao  pude  neste  engano, 
Que  he  grande  dos  amantes  a  cegueira 
Encheu-se  me  com  grandes  abundangas 
peito  de  dezejos  e  esperangas. 


428  POETICAL  EXTRACTS. 

Ja,  nescio,  ja  da  guerra  desistindo, 
Huma  noite  de  Doris  promettida, 
Me  apparece  de  longe  o  gesto  Undo, 
Da  branca  Thetis,  unica,  despida  : 
Como  doudo  corn  de  longe  abrindo 
Os  bragos  para  aquella  que  era  vida 
Deste  corpo,  e  comego  os  olhos  bellos 
A  Ihe  beijar  as  faces,  e  os  cabellos. 

Oh  que  nao  sei  de  nojo  como  o  conte ! 
Que  crendo  ter  nos  bragos  quern  amava, 
Abragado  me  achei  co'  hum  duro  monte 
De  aspero  mato,  e  de  espessura  brava : 
Estando  co'  hum  penedo  fronte  afronte, 
Que  eu  pelo  rosto  angelico  apertava, 
Nao  fiquei  homem  nao,  mas  mudo,  e  quedo, 
E  junto  a  hum  penedo  outro  penedo. 

O'  Nympha  a  mais  formosa  do  Oceano, 
Ja  que  minha  presenga  nao  te  agrada, 
Que  te  custava  ter-me  neste  engaiio, 
Ou  fosse  monte,  nuvem,  sonho,  on  nada? 
D'  aqui  me  parto  irado,  e  quasi  insano 
Da  magoa,  e  da  deshonra  alii  passada, 
A  buscar  outro  muiido,  onde  nao  visse 
Quern  de  meu  pranto,  e  de  meu  mal  se  risse. 

Erao  jd  neste  tempo  meus  irmaos 

Vencidos,  e  em  miseria  extrema  postos ; 
E,  por  mais  segurar-se  os  Deoses  vaos, 
Alguns  a  varies  montes  sotopostos  : 
E  como  contra  o  Ceo  nao  valeni  maos, 
Eu  que  chorando  andava  mens  desgostos 
Comecei  a  sentir  do  fado  imigo 
Por  meus  atrevimentos  o  castigo. 


POETICAL  EXTRACTS.  429 

Converte-se-me  a  carne  em  terra  dura, 
Em  penedos  os  ossos  se  fizeram  ; 
Estes  membros  que  ves,  e  esta  figura, 
Por  estas  longas  aguas  se  estenderam  : 
Emfim  minha  grandissima  estatura 
Neste  remoto  cabo  converteram 
Os  Deoses,  e  por  mais  dobradas  magoas, 
Me  anda  Thetis  cercando  destas  agoas. 

Assim  contava,  e  co'  hum  medonho  choro 
Subito  dante  os  olhos  se  apartou ; 
Desfez-se  a  nuvem  negra,  e  co'  hum  sonoro 
Bramido  niuito  longe  o  mar  soou. 
Eu,  levantando  as  maos  ao  sancto  coro 
Dos  Anjos,  que  tao  longe  nos  guiou, 
A  Deos  pedi,  que  removesse  os  duros 
Casos  que  Adamastor  contou  futures. 


From  the  second  Canto  of  the  same. 

Ouvio-lhe  estas  palavras  piedosas 
A  formosa  Dione,  e  commovida 
De  entre  as  Nymphas  se  vai,  que  saudosas 
Ficarao  desta  subita  partida. 
J4  penetra  as  estrellas  luminosas, 
Ja  na  terceira  Esfera  recebida 
Avante  passa,  e  14  no  sexto  Ceo, 
Para  onde  estava  o  Padre  se  moveo. 


430  POETICAL  EXTRACTS. 

E  como  hia  affrontada  do  caminho, 
Tao  formosa  no  gesto  se  inostrava, 
Que  as  estrellas,  e  o  Ceo,  e  o  ar  vizinho, 
E  tudo  quanto  a  via  namorava, 
Dos  olhos,  onde  faz  sen  filho  o  ninho, 
Huns  espiritos  vivos  inspirava, 
Com  que  os  Polos  gelados  accendia, 
E  tornava  de  fogo  a  Esfera  fria. 

E  por  mais  namorar  o  Soberano 

Padre,  de  quern  foi  sempre  amada,  e  cara, 
Se  Ihe  apresenta  assi,  como  ao  Troyano 
Na  selva  Idea  ja  se  apresentara. 
Se  a  vira  o  cagador  que  o  vulto  humano 
Perdeo  vendo  a  Diana  na  agua  clara 
Nunca  os  famintos  galgos  o  mataram, 
Que  primeiro  desejos  o  acabaram. 

Os  crespos  fios  de  ouro  se  esparziam 
Pelo  collo  que  a  ne>e  escurecia  ; 
Andando  as  lacteas  tetas  Ihe  tremiam 
Com  quern  Amor  brincava,  e  nao  se  via : 
Da  alva  petrina  flamas  Ihe  sahiam, 
Onde  o  menino  as  almas  accendia ; 
Pelas  lizas  columnas  Ihe  trepavam. 
Desejos,  que  como  hera  se  enrolavam. 

•C'  hum  delgado  sendal  as  partes  cobre 
De  quern  vergonha  he  natural  reparo  : 
Porem  nem  tudo  esconde,  nem  descobre 
0  veo  dos  roxos  lirios  pouco  ovaro  : 
Mas  para  que  o  desejo  accenda  e  dobre, 
Lhe  poe  diante  aquelle  objecto  raro. 
Ja  se  sentem  no  Ceo  por  toda  a  parte 
•Ci umes  em  Vulcano,  amor  em  Marte. 


POETICAL  EXTRACTS.  431 

E  mostraudo  no  angelico  semblante 
C'  o  riso  huma  tristeza  misturada, 
Como  dama  que  foi  do  incauto  amante 
Em  brincos  amorosos  mal  tratada, 
Que  se  queixa  e  se  ri  n'  hum  mesmo  instante, 
E  se  mostra  entre  alegre  magoada  ; 
Desta  arte  a  Deosa,  a  quern  nenhuma  iguala, 
Mais  mimosa  que  triste  ao  Padre  falla. 


From  the  first  Idyll  of  Boccage. 

A'  foz  do  Tejo,  em  bronca  penedia, 
Minada  pelas  ondas  salitrosas, 
Prisioneiro  de  amor  Tritao  gemia. 

Luziao  Ihe  as  espadoas  escamosas, 
Sustentava  o  maritimo  instrumento, 
0  buzio  atroador  nas  maos  callosas ; 

-Conchas  da  cor  do  liquido  Elemcnto 
Parte  do  corpo  enorme  Ihe  vestiao, 
Igual  na  ligeireza  ao  proprio  vento. 

Da  barba  salsas  gotas  Ihe  cahiao, 
E  nos  olhos,  que  Amor  affogueava, 
Em  borbotoes  as  lagrimas  ferviao. 

Lilia,  que  hum  Bosque  proximo  habitava, 
Lilia  a  Napea  desdenhosa  e  bella, 
Amorosos  clamores  Ihe  arrancava  : 

Hum  dia  a  vio  na  praia,  e  so  de  vella 
Sen  coragao  feroz  enfeiti9ado, 
Voou,  gemendo,  para  os  olhos  della. 


432  POETICAL  EXTRACTS. 


Das  entranhas  do  Pelago  salgado, 
Louco  de  Amores,  louco  de  saudades, 
0  queixoso  Amador  tinha  saltado. 

Do  Pai,  que  abafa  as  negras  tempestades,. 
J4  seu  voraz  tormento  era  sabido, 
E  das  outras  Equoreas  Divindades. 

De  aereas  esperan^as  illudido, 
Grao  tempo  seu  espirito  saudoso, 
Rastejando  a  cruel,  vagou  perdido  ; 

Grao  tempo  glorias  vas  sonhou  teimoso, 
Antes  que  desse  fructuosa  entrada 
Ao  acre  desengano  o  peito  ancioso, 


THE  END. 


LONDON  :  Printed  by  STRANOKWAYS  &  SONS,  Tower  Street,  Cambridge  Circus,  W.C. 


It 

o 


CD 


10 


o 
to 


<D 
05 

3! 


O        ***! 
•r*        -f* 


O: 

^ 


_j 

3*  S 

XA  dQ " 

«i  to 


u 

o 

5      « 

3 

•<        H 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "Ref.  Index  File" 

Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


